 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE:  19 June 2018 
 
Product Identifier 

 

SRM Number:  1849a 
SRM Name: 

Infant/Adult Nutritional Formula I (milk-based) 

Under the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 29 CFR 1910.1200, 
this Standard Reference Material (SRM) is NOT classified as a physical hazard or a health hazard, a simple asphyxiant, 
combustible  dust,  pyrophoric  gas,  or  hazard  not  otherwise  classified.    There  are  no  hazard  pictograms,  hazard 
statements or signal word associated with it.  Safety Data Sheet information is not required.  This document may be 
used in conjunction with your hazard communication program. 
 
Description:    This  SRM  is  intended  primarily  for  validation  of  methods  for  determining  proximates,  fatty  acids, 
cholesterol,  vitamins,  elements,  amino  acids,  and  nucleotides  in  infant  and  adult  nutritional  formulas  and  similar 
materials.  This SRM can also be used for quality assurance when assigning values to in house reference materials.  
The SRM is a milk-based, hybrid infant/adult nutritional powder prepared by a manufacturer of infant formula and 
adult  nutritional  products.    A  unit  of  SRM 1849a  consists  of  10  packets,  each  containing  approximately  10 g  of 
material. 
 
Additional Notes:  SRM 1849a is intended for laboratory use only, NOT FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION.  This 
material contains some nutrients at levels not permitted in infant formula and is NOT AN INFANT FORMULA.  See 
Certificate of Analysis for storage and use instructions.   
 
Disposal:  SRM 1849a components should be disposed of in accordance with local, state, and federal regulations. 
 
Transport  Information:    This  material  is  not  regulated  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Transportation (DOT)  and/or 
International Air Transport Association (IATA). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:   This document was prepared carefully, using current references.  Users of this SRM should ensure that 
this document and the corresponding Certificate of Analysis in their possession are current.  This can be accomplished 
by contacting the SRM Program:  telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srmmsds@nist.gov; or via 
the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

SRM 1849a 

 

Page 1 of 1 

