 
SRM Supplier:   National Institute of Standards and Technology  SRM Number:   3065 

MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEET 

  Standard Reference Materials Program 
  100 Bureau Drive, Mail Stop 2321 
  Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899-2321 
 

 

MSDS Number:   3065 
SRM Name:   Chlorinated Herbicides-I in  
 
Date of Issue:  14 May 2003 

Methanol 

MSDS Coordinator:  Carmen S. Davis 
Phone:  (301) 975-6776 
ChemTrec:  1-800-424-9300 

SECTION I.  MATERIAL IDENTIFICATION 

FAX:  (301) 926-4751 
E-mail:  SRMMSDS@nist.gov 

 

Material Name:  Chlorinated Herbicides-I in Methanol 
 
Description:    SRM  3065  consists  of five 2-mL ampoules, each containing approximately 1.2 mL of a solution of 
chlorinated herbicides in methanol. 
 
Other  Designations:    Chlorinated  Herbicides  in  Methanol  (methyl  alcohol;  wood  alcohol;  methyl  hydroxide; 
carbinol;  monohydroxymethane;  wood  spirit;  wood  naphtha;  methylol;  Colonial  Spirit*;  Columbian  Spirit*; 
Pyroxylic Spirit*) 
 
Name 
Methanol 
 
DOT Classification:  Methanol, UN1230   (Small Quantity Exemption) 
 
Manufacturer/Supplier:  Available from a number of suppliers 
 
* Trade name 
 
**For  the  CAS  Registry  Numbers  of  the  chlorinated  herbicides  in  this  material,  refer  to  the  corresponding  Certificate  of 
Analysis. 
 

CAS Registry Number** 
67-56-1 

Chemical Formula 
CH3OH 

SECTION II.  HAZARDOUS INGREDIENTS 

 

Methanol 

Hazardous Components 

Nominal Concentration (%) 

Exposure Limits and Toxicity Data 

99 

ACGIH TLV-TWA (skin):   200 mg/kg or 262 mg/m3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OSHA TLV-TWA (skin):   200 mg/kg or 262 mg/m3 

Human, Inhalation:  TCLO:   86 000 mg/m3 

Human, Inhalation:  TCLO:   300 mg/kg 

Human, Oral:  LDLO:   143 mg/kg 

Man, Oral:  TDLO:   3429 mg/kg 

Rat, Oral:  LD50:   5628 mg/kg 

< 0.1 % 

Not applicable 

Page 1 of 4 

Chlorinated Herbicides: 

Acifluorfen 

Bentazon 

2,4-D 

2,4,-D butyl ester 

Dalapon 

Dicamba 

Picloram 

2,4,5-TP (Silvex) 

MSDS 3065 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MSDS 3065 

Page 2 of 4 

 
 

 

 

Note:  This material contains chlorinated herbicides, many of which have been reported to have toxic, 
mutagenic, and/or carcinogenic properties, and should be handled with care.  The carcinogens in this 
material  have  a  total  concentration  <  0.1  %  and  do  not  require  individual  MSDS  information  under 
current regulations.  For actual concentrations, see the corresponding Certificate of Analysis. 

SECTION III.  PHYSICAL/CHEMICAL CHARACTERISTICS 

Methanol 

Appearance and Odor:  a clear, colorless 
liquid with a characteristic alcoholic odor 

Vapor Pressure (@ 20 °C):   97.25 mm Hg 

Relative Molecular Mass:   32.04 

Evaporation Rate (butyl acetate = 1):   4.6 

Density:   0.7914 g/mL 

Viscosity (@ 20 °C):   0.59 cP 

Boiling Point:   65 °C 

Freezing Point:  -94 °C 

Solvent Solubility:  soluble in ether, benzene, 
alcohol, acetone, chloroform, ethanol, ketones, 
and most other organic solvents 

Water Solubility:   soluble 

 
 

SECTION IV.  FIRE AND EXPLOSION HAZARD DATA 

 
Methanol 
Flash Point:  11 °C 
 
Flammability Limits in Air (Volume %):  UPPER: 

LOWER: 

36 
6.0 

Method Used:  Closed Cup 

Autoignition Temperature:  385 °C 

 
Unusual Fire and Explosion Hazards:  Methanol is a severe fire and explosion hazard when exposed to heat or 
flame.  Vapors are heavier than air and may travel a considerable distance to a source of ignition and flash back. 
Vapor and air mixtures are explosive. 

Chlorinated herbicides are a negligible fire hazard. 
 
Extinguishing Media:  Use alcohol-resistant foam, dry chemical, carbon dioxide, or water spray. 
 
Special Fire Procedures:  Fire fighters should wear a self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) with a full face 
piece in the pressure demand or positive mode and other protective clothing. 

MSDS 3065 

Page 3 of 4 

 

SECTION V.  REACTIVITY DATA 

 

X 

Stable 

Unstable 

 
Stability: 
 
Conditions  to  Avoid:    Avoid  contact  with  heat,  sparks,  flames,  or  other  sources  of  ignition.   Avoid inhalation of 
vapors or combustion by-products.  Avoid contact with the skin.  DO NOT allow the material to contaminate water 
sources. 
 
Incompatibility (Materials to Avoid):  Methanol is incompatible with halo carbons, combustible materials, metals, 
oxidizing materials, halogens, metal carbide, bases, and acids. 
 
Chlorinated herbicides are  incompatible with oxidizing materials. 
 
See Section IV:  Unusual Fire and Explosion Hazards 
 
Hazardous  Decomposition  or  By-products:    Thermal  decomposition  products  of  methanol  may  include  toxic 
oxides of carbon.   
 
Thermal decomposition products of chlorinated herbicides may include halogenated compounds. 
 
Hazardous Polymerization 
 
 

X  Will Not Occur 

Will Occur 

 

SECTION VI.  HEALTH HAZARD DATA 

X 

X 

X 

Skin 

Inhalation 

  Ingestion 

 
Route of Entry: 
 
Methanol:  Methanol is a fatal poison.  This material is harmful if inhaled or absorbed through skin.  Ingestion may 
be fatal or cause blindness.  Symptoms of exposure may include burning sensation, coughing, wheezing, laryngitis, 
shortness  of  breath,  headache,  nausea,  and  vomiting.    Exposure  can  cause  damage  to  the  eyes,  liver,  heart,  and 
kidneys. Methanol may also cause gastrointestinal disturbances, convulsions, and/or nerve damage. 
 
Chlorinated  Herbicides:    Exposure  to  chlorinated  herbicides  can  cause  cough,  confusion,  ataxia,  headache, 
weakness, and dizziness.  Ingestion may cause abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.  Herbicides are liver 
toxins. 
 
Medical Conditions Generally Aggravated by Exposure:  Methanol may affect eye disorders, kidney disorders, 
skin disorders, and allergies.  Chlorinated herbicides may affect liver and convulsive disorders. 
 
Listed as a Carcinogen/Potential Carcinogen (Methanol): 

 
In the National Toxicology Program (NTP) Report on Carcinogens 
In the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) Monographs 
By the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 

 
 
Listed as a Carcinogen/Potential Carcinogen (Chlorinated Herbicides)*: 

 
In the National Toxicology Program (NTP) Report on Carcinogens 
In the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) Monographs 
By the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 

 
 
* Many chlorinated herbicides are classified as carcinogens or potential carcinogens. 

 

 

 

 

Yes 
 
 
 

Yes 
* 
* 
* 

No 
X 
X 
X 

No 
* 
* 
* 

MSDS 3065 

Page 4 of 4 

EMERGENCY AND FIRST AID PROCEDURES: 
 

Skin  Contact:    Remove  contaminated  shoes  and  clothing.    Rinse  affected  area  with  large  amounts  of  water 
followed by washing the area with soap and water.  Watch for chemical irritations and treat them accordingly. 
Obtain medical assistance if necessary.  
 
Eye Contact:  Immediately flush eyes, including under the eyelids, with copious amounts of water for at least 
15 minutes.  Obtain medical assistance. 
 
Inhalation:  If inhaled, move the victim to fresh air.  If breathing is difficult, give oxygen; if the victim is not 
breathing, give artificial respiration.  Obtain medical assistance if necessary.  
 
Ingestion:  If ingested, wash out mouth with water.  Obtain medical assistance immediately.   

TARGET ORGAN(S) OF ATTACK:  Methanol:  central nervous system (CNS) 
 
 

Chlorinated Herbicides:  liver 

SECTION VII.  PRECAUTIONS FOR SAFE HANDLING AND USE 

 

 

Steps to be Taken in Case Material Is Released or Spilled:  Notify safety personnel of major spills and/or leaks. 
Evacuate nonessential personnel.  Absorb small spills with sand or other absorbent material and place into containers 
for disposal.  DO NOT flush into a sewer.  Keep out of watersheds and waterways. 
 
Waste Disposal:  Follow all federal, state, and local laws governing disposal. 
 
Handling and Storage:  Persons handling this material must wear protective eyewear, clothing, and gloves to prevent 
contact  with  this  material.    This  material  contains  chlorinated  herbicides,  which  has  been  reported  to  have  possible 
carcinogenic properties, and should be handled with care. 
 

NOTE:  Contact lenses pose a special problem; soft lenses may absorb irritants and all lenses 
concentrate them.  DO NOT wear contact lenses in the laboratory. 

 
Protect containers from physical damage.  Sealed ampoules, as received, should be stored in the dark at temperatures 
lower than 30 °C.  Keep material in a well-ventilated area away from incompatible materials. 
 

 
SECTION VIII.  SOURCE DATA/OTHER COMMENTS  

Merck Index, 11th Ed., 1989. 
The Sigma Aldrich Library of Chemical Safety Data, Ed. II, 1988. 

 
Sources:  MDL Information Systems, Inc., MSDS Methyl Alcohol, 19 June 2001. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:  Physical and chemical data contained in this MSDS are provided only for use in assessing the hazardous 
nature of the material.  The MSDS was prepared carefully, using current references; however, NIST does not certify 
the data on the MSDS.  The certified value for this material is given in the NIST Certificate of Analysis. 

MSDS 3065 

Page 5 of 4 

