National  Institute  of  Standards  &  Cechnology 

Vertificate 

Standard  Reference  Material  1002d 

Surface  Flammability  Standard 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  intended  for  use  in  checking  the  operation  of  radiant-panel  test 
equipment  in  accordance  with  the  calibration  and  standardization  techniques  described  in  ASTM  Standard 
E162-78,  Test  for  Surface  Flammability  of  Materials  Using  a  Radiant  Heat  Source. 

This  SRM  consists  of  four  sheets  of  tempered  fibrous-felted  hardboard,  457  x  152  x  6  mm  (18  x  6  x  1/4  in). 
certified  for  its  Flame  Spread  Index,  I,  and  its  Heat  Evolution  Factor,  Q. 

It  is 

Property 

Flame  Spread  Index,  I 

Heat  Evolution  Factor,  Q 

Number 
of  Tests 

15 

15 

| 
Value 

203 

42.0 

Coefficient  of 
Variation  (%) 

5.2 

3.8 

The  coefficient  of  variation  is  the  ratio  of  the  standard  deviation  to  the  average  value  expressed  as  a  percent. 

Tests  over  a  month  period  were  made  on  the  smoother  side  (opposite  the  label)  of  representative  samples  of  this 
lot,  which  had  previously  been  dried  and  conditioned  (see  Conditioning). 

The  wire  mesh  screen  previously  required  when  testing 
even  burning  and  well  defined  flame  fronts 

aS 

oii 

me 

= 

are  obtained  without  the  wire  screen 

vas  wy 

wi  wane 

wa 

this  SRM  was  not  used  for  recertification  testing.  More 

Conditioning:  Before  testing,  SRM  1002d  must  be  dried  for  24  hours  at  60  °C,  and  then  conditioned  to  equilibrium 
at  23  +  3  °C  and  50  +  5  percent  relative  humidity. 

This  SRM  is  anticipated  to  have  an  indefinite  shelf-life  under  normal  use  and  storage  conditions. 

The  tests  and  measurements  leading  to  the  certification  of  this  SRM  were  performed  by  J.R.  Lawson  of  the  NIST 
Center  for  Fire  Research. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  Standard 
Reference  Material  were  coordinated  through  the  Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials  by  R.W.  Seward  and 
A.  Dragoo. 

August  24,  1989 
Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 

Stanley  D.  Rasberry,  Chief 
Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials

  

