J.S.  Departriieie’ ‘of  Commerce 

Ba 

   

t  Standards 
Director 

. 

National  Bureau  of  Standards 

Standard  Reference  Material  1012 

Flooring  Radiant  Panel 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  consists  of  three  sheets  of  kraft  paperboard  104.1  cm  long,  by  25.4  cm  wide, 
and  3.05  mm  thick.  It  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  checking  the  operation  of  flooring  radiant  panel  test  apparatus  used 
to  measure  critical  radiant  flux.  Use  of  this  SRM  does  not  obviate  the  need  for  following  the  prescribed  calibration  and 
standardization  techniques  outlined  in  the  American  Society  for  Testing  and  Materials  (ASTM)  Standard  Test 
Procedure  E648-78. 

The  certified  value  for  average  critical  radiant  flux  is: 

CRF  =  0.36  +  0.04  W-cm 

Tit  eee  ee  eon  leee  to  the  ene: 
at  =f  EAN  bt  Ota  pee eh  ne  eA  OTL, 
LHiS  McCann  Vaiwe  is  tic  result  of  tests  on  31  randomly  selected  samples  for  a  lot  O1  YUU  STICTLS  Ol  AIT 
alt  papcrooarda.  ine 
associated  uncertainty  is  the  standard  deviation  based  on  these  measurements.  The  critical  radiant  flux  measurements 
were  made  in  accordance  with  the  detailed  procedures  presented  in  ASTM  Standard  E648-78,  “Test  Method  for  Critical 
Radiant  Flux  of  Floor-Covering  Systems  Using  a  Radiant  Heat  Energy  Source,”  and  in  National  Fire  Protection 
Association  (NFPA)  253-1978,  “Method  of  Test  for  Critical  Radiant  Flux  of  Floor  Covering  Systems  Using  a  Radiant 
Heat  Energy  Source.” 

relative  humidity. 
NOTE:  Prior  to  test,  the  material  must  be  conditioned  to  equilibrium  at  23 +  3  °C  and  50 +5  percent 
The  material is  certified  for  use  without  regard  to  orientation  of  surface;  i.e.,  either  the  obverse  or  reverse  may  be  placed 
on  the  substrate. 

Storage: 
conditioning. 
contamination  or  degradation. 

This  material  should  be  stored  flat  in  the  hermetically  sealed  aluminized  plastic  sleeve  until  removed  for 
Sheets  not  intended  for  immediate  conditioning  should  be  resealed  in  the  sleeve  to  avoid  possible 

En  gineearin 
 
awh  Fld  Aww  bad  ts  >

 
o

 
>

 
a

 
s
a

 
3

 
e
g

nd  analvsis  leading 

to  th 

Mase  y  way  Aweseissd ng  Ld 

vA. 

 
5

n 

 
3

 
Q

 
 4
e

by  J.R.  Lawson  and  J.  Poole  of  the  Center  for 

Fire  Research. 

The  support  aspects  involved  in  the  certification  and  issuance  of  this  Standard  Reference  Material  were  coordinated 
through  the  Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials  by  R.W.  Seward: 

September  14,  1984 

ANnano 
Gaithersburg,  MD  2V077 

a, 

Stanley  D.  Rasberry,  Chief 

TOE A 
Uilice  OF  Standard  mererence  Materials

Aneel  DN  eolecsne 

Mataeians 

Af  O41, 

  

