*Uneay  of 

National  Bureau  of  Standards 

Certificate  of  Analysis 

Standard  Reference  Material  1216 

Carbon  Modified  Silica 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  consists  of  three  bottles,  each  containing  approximately  one  g  of  chemically 
modified  microparticulate  silica.  SRM  1216  is  intended  for  use  in  the  calibration  of  instruments  used  in  the  deter- 
mination  of  total  elemental  carbon.  It  may  also  be  useful  in  studies  involving  the  measurement  of  carbon  content 
of  metals  especially  when  gas  fusion  infrared  detection  instruments  are  used. 

Certified  Carbon  Values  in  SRM  1216: 
Three  concentration  levels  of  carbon  are  provided  in  the  SRM,  designated  I,  II,  II.  The  certified  value  for  carbon 
in  each  of  these  samples  is  listed  below. 

Bottle 

I 
If 
Il 

Percent  Carbon 

70  +  0.12 
9.06  +  0.24 
17.04  +  0.43 

The  uncertainties  listed  are  two  standard  deviations  for  a  single  determination.  It  is  estimated  that  any  uncertain- 
ties  due  to  systematic  error  are  included  within  these  limits. 

NOTICE  AND  WARNINGS  TO  USER 

Expiration  of  Certification:  This  certification  is  valid,  within  the  limits  certified,  for  one  year  from  the  date  of  ship- 
ment.  NBS  will  continue  to  monitor  these  materials  and  substantive  change  in  their  certification  will  be  reported 
to  the  purchaser. 

Use:  Prior  to  use,  samples  for  analysis  should  be  dried  at  85  °C  for  three  hours,  under  reduced  pressure(  ~  100  Pa). 
To  minimize  sample  "creep"  during  drying,  one  should  reduce  pressure  gradually  by  equilibrating  the  sample  at 
several  intermediate  pressures  for  5-10  minutes. 

Toxicity:  The  toxicity  of  this  SRM  has  not  been  defined  precisely;  however,  this  material  consists  of  finely  divided 
siliceous  particles  and  as  such  should  be  treated  as  a  potential  health  hazard. 

Analytical  determinations  were  performed  at  the  Center  for  Analytical  Chemistry,  Inorganic  Analytical  Research 
Division,  by  R.C.  Gauer,  T.W.  Vetter,  B.I.  Diamondstone,  and  R.M.  Lindstrom. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  Standard  Reference 
Material  were  coordinated  through  the  Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials  by  W.P.  Reed. 

November  20,  1987 
Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 

Stanley  D.  Rasberry,  Chief 
Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials 

(over)

  

Preparation  and  Analysis: 
SRM  1216  consists  of  three  aliquots  of  porous  microparticulate  silica  (particle  diameter  ~  20  ym,  pore  diameter 
~30  nm).  Aliquot  I  consists  of  unmodified  silica,  and  aliquots  II  and  III  were  chemically  modified  by  reacting  with 
The  bare  and  modified  silica  substrates  were  prepared  by  the  Separations  Group, 
octadecyltrichlorosilane. 
Hesperia,  CA.  Packaging  was  carried  out  at  the  National  Bureau  of  Standards.  Samples  from  various  stages  of  the 
packaging  process  were  analyzed  using  gas  fusion  with  infrared  detection.  No  significant  differences  in  the  con- 
centration  levels  of  carbon  were  observed  among  samples  for  each  aliquot.  The  certification  measurements  on 
these  samples  were  made  using  gas  fusion  with  infrared  detection  and  were  corroborated  by  prompt  gamma  activa- 
tion  analysis. 

Gas  Fusion: 
Samples  weighing  approximately  100  mg  were  diluted  with  low  carbon  steel  flux  and  tungsten  accelerator  in  order 
to  provide  proper  burning  conditions.  The  carbon  was  extracted  from  the  samples  by  gas  fusion  and  was  converted 
to  carbon  dioxide  where  it  was  measured  by  an  infrared  detector.  The  values  provided  by  this  technique  are  the 
result  of  at  least  100  individual  measurements  at  each  concentration  level. 

Prompt  Gamma  Activation  Analysis  (PGAA): 
Samples  weighing  200-400  mg  were  weighed  into  aluminum  foil  containers  and  were  irradiated  in  a  neutron  beam 
for  periods  of  10-17  h.  Pelletized  standards  of  sucrose,  graphite,  and  urea  were  irradiated  at  the  same  time.  Cor- 
rections  were  made  for  blank  and  pulse  pileup.  Uncertainty  in  these  carbon  measurements  were  mainly  a  result  of 
counting  statistics. 

Reference 

Diamondstone,  B.I.  and  Gauer,  R.C.,  Analyst,  1986,  111,  p955,  Determination  of  Total  Carbon  in  Biological 
Materials.

