National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material 1507b 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

11-Nor-Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinol-9-Carboxylic Acid in Freeze-Dried Urine 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  verifying  the  accuracy  of methods used for the 
determination  of  11-nor-delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol-9-carboxylic  acid (THC-9-COOH)  in  human  urine.    A  unit  of 
SRM 1507b  consists  of  three  bottles  of  freeze-dried  urine:    two  bottles,  each  containing  a  different  certified 
concentration  of  THC-9-COOH  and  one  bottle  of  a  urine  blank.    The  bottles  are  labeled  as  levels  1507b-1, 
1507b-2, and 1507b-0, respectively.  The contents of each bottle must be reconstituted with 20.0 mL of organic-free 
or HPLC-grade water. 
 
Certified  Concentrations:    The  certified  concentrations  and  uncertainties  apply  only  to  urine  reconstituted  as 
specified under “Reconstitution Procedure”.  The certified concentrations and uncertainties are based on the results 
of  measurements  made  at  NIST  by  gas  chromatography/mass  spectrometry (GC/MS),  gas  chromatography/tandem 
mass spectrometry (GC/MS/MS), and liquid chromatography (LC) and measurements by GC/MS at five laboratories 
involved with the Department of Defense Drug Testing Program.  All NIST analytical measurements were based on 
calibration solutions prepared from weighed quantities of THC-9-COOH obtained from Research Triangle Institute 
(Research  Triangle  Park, NC).    Stability  measurements  have  been  performed  using  liquid  chromatography/mass 
spectrometry (LC/MS). 
 
The  certified  concentrations  of  THC-9-COOH  in  the  reconstituted  urine  are  given  in  Table 1  with  estimated 
uncertainties.    THC-9-COOH  was  not  detected  in  the  urine  blank.    The  limit  of  detection,  XD,  refers  to  the 
underlying true analyte concentration that the employed chemical measurement process is capable of detecting [1]. 
The  measurand  is  the  total  concentration  of  THC-9-COOH  in  reconstituted  urine  and  the  values  listed  are 
metrologically traceable to the SI unit for concentration (expressed as nanograms per milliliter and micromoles per 
liter. 
 

Table 1.  Certified Concentrations for THC-9-COOH in SRM 1507b 

Concentration Level 

 

Low  

(1507b-1) 

 
I

Medium  

7b- 
(1507b-2) 

(ng/mL) 

11.7  ±  1.4 

 
+
I

24.1  ±  1.3 

 
+

Concentration 

(mmol/L) 

1 

 
x

x 

(3.40  ×  10–5)  ±  (0.41  ×  10–5) 
(7.00  ×  10–5)  ±  (0.38  ×  10–5) 
XD: (< 3)  ×  10–6 

xX 

8 

Blank  

(1507b-0) 

 
 
Each  certified  concentration  is  a  weighted  average  of  results  from  each  method,  the  weights  being  determined 
iteratively.    Given  the  weights,  the  effective  degrees  of  freedom  are  then  calculated  from  the  weights.    Given  the 
weighted average  x  and the effective degrees of freedom, df, the approximate 95 percent confidence interval is [2]: 
 

XD: < 1 

x   ±  t (0.975, df)

)(ˆ xσ

 

 
For the two levels, the effective degrees of freedom are 3.5 and 3.9 respectively for levels 1507b-1 and 1507b-2.  The 
standard errors of the weighted averages were 0.49 and 0.47. 
 
Expiration  of  Certification:    The  certification  of  SRM 1507b  is  valid,  within  the  measurement  uncertainty 
10ns 
specified,  until  31 December 2026,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  the  instructions 
given in this certificate (see “Instructions for Handling, Storage, and Use”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM 
is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  14 December 2016 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

lling,  Storage,  and  Use”).

Page 1 of 4 

  

SRM 1507b 

Maintenance  of  SRM  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If 
substantive  technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will 
notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Overall direction and coordination of the preparation and technical measurements leading to the original certification 
of  this  SRM  were  performed  under  the  direction  of  M.J. Welch  and  W.E. May  formerly  of  the  NIST  Analytical 
Chemistry Division. 
 
Coordination of the measurements for the reanalysis of the SRM was performed by M.J. Welch formerly of the NIST 
Analytical Chemistry Division.  
 
Analytical determinations for the reanalysis of the SRM were performed by L.T. Sniegoski and S.S. Tai of the NIST 
Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Chemical 
The  original  analytical  measurements  were  performed  by  L.C. Sander  and  S.S. Tai  of  the  NIST  Chemical 
Sciences Division. 
 
Statistical consultation was provided by K.J. Coakley of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Office 
Support aspects involved with the certification and issuance of this SRM were coordinated through the NIST Office 
of Reference Materials. 
 
NOTICE AND WARNINGS TO USER 
 
SRM 1507b  IS  INTENDED  FOR  RESEARCH  USE.    THIS  IS  A  HUMAN-SOURCE  MATERIAL.    HANDLE 
PRODUCT  AS  A  BIOHAZARDOUS  MATERIAL  CAPABLE  OF  TRANSMITTING  INFECTIOUS  DISEASE.  
THE  RECONSTITUTED  URINE  SHOULD  BE  HANDLED  WITH  PRECAUTIONS  SUITABLE  FOR  FRESH 
URINE.  No known test method can offer complete assurance that Hepatitis B virus, HIV, or other infectious agents 
are absent from this material. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
Storage  and  Stability:    Prior  to  reconstitution,  SRM 1507b  should  be  stored  in  the  dark  at  a  temperature 
between −10 °C and 5 °C. 
 
Reconstitution  Procedure:    For  the  certified  concentration  to  be  valid  within  the  specified  uncertainty,  the  SRM 
must be reconstituted as follows:  Add 20.0 mL of organic-free or HPLC grade water at room temperature to each 
bottle.  Allow the bottles to stand with occasional swirling for 30 min to ensure complete dissolution.  Do not shake. 
Vigorous shaking causes foaming which leads to inhomogeneous distribution of the analyte within the bottle.  After 
the completion of the reconstitution procedure, samples should be extracted and processed within l h for the certified 
concentrations to be valid. 
 
SOURCE, PREPARATION, AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
Source  and  Preparation  of  Material:    SRM 1507b  THC-9-COOH  was  prepared  by  Consolidated  Technologies 
Inc. (Austin, TX).  The urine used to prepare this material was collected from male donors tested and found negative 
for THC-9-COOH.  Processing for this SRM was carried out under clean conditions.  The bulk urine was processed 
as  one  master  lot.    The  master  lot  of  urine  was  filtered  through  a  0.22 µm  cellulose  acetate  filter.    It  was  then 
fortified,  and  appropriate  dilutions  were  made.    THC-9-COOH  in  ethanol  was  used  for  the  fortification.    The 
THC-9-COOH  solution  was  obtained  from  Research  Triangle  Institute  (Research  Triangle  Park, NC).    All  levels 
were dispensed into amber glass vials (20.0 mL per vial) and freeze-dried.  The net weight of the urine added to each 
vial varied by less than 1.0 % relative standard deviation over the entire filling range.  

DLING, 

tio 

                                                           

(1)Certain commercial equipment, instrumentation, or materials are identified in this certificate to specify adequately the 
e  to  specify  adequately  the
experimental  procedure.    Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  National  Institute  of 
Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the 
purpose. 

SRM 1507b 

Page 2 of 4 

Analytical Methods for Certification 
   
GC/MS  Analysis:    Three  series  of  measurements,  separated  by  approximately one year, were performed at NIST 
using methods based on GC/MS.  For the first series, a total of twelve randomly selected vials, in two independent 
sets, were analyzed for each level.  Samples were reconstituted as described in the “Reconstitution Procedure”, and a 
single 10.0 mL aliquot was withdrawn from each vial.  For the second and third series, three randomly selected vials, 
in three independent sets, were analyzed.  Two 8.0 mL aliquots were withdrawn from each vial for the second series 
and a single 10.0 mL for the third series.  Each aliquot was spiked with an isotopically labeled internal standard, 
5'-d3-11-nor-delta-9-THC-9-carboxylic  acid.    The  samples  were  processed  using  C18 solid-phase  extraction 
cartridges  to  isolate  the  THC-9-COOH  from  the  urine.    The  THC-9-COOH  was  converted  to  its  trimethylsilyl 
derivative for analysis. 
 
The GC/MS measurements were performed using a quadruple mass spectrometer operated in the electron ionization 
mode  with  a  30 m  nonpolar  fused  silica  capillary  column  connected  directly  to  the  ion  source.    Molecular  ions at 
m/z 488 and 491 for the unlabeled and labeled forms, respectively, were monitored for the first two series.  For the 
third  series  fragment  ions  at  m/z 371  and  374  were  monitored.    Analyte  concentrations  were  calculated  by  linear 
interpolation from calibration curves constructed for each set of samples. 
 
GC/MS  Analysis  (Laboratories  Affiliated  with  The  Department  of  Defense  Drug  Testing  Program):    A 
standard Department of Defense procedure for determination of THC-9-COOH by GC/MS was used by laboratories 
affiliated with the Department of Defense Drug Testing Program.  The method involved the addition of a deuterated 
internal  standard  to  10 mL  of  the  reconstituted  urine,  followed  by  treatment  with  aqueous  KOH  to  hydrolyze  any 
THC-9-COOH  esters.    The  solution  is  then  buffered  to  a  pH  between  9  and  10  and  put  through  a  solid-phase 
extraction  column.    The  eluent  is  evaporated,  and  iodomethane  and  tetramethylammonium  hydroxide  in 
dimethylsulfoxide  are  added  to  form  the  methyl  ester  of  THC-9-COOH.    The  derivative  is  extracted  into  organic 
solvents  for  injection  into  a  GC/MS  instrument  equipped  with  a  nonpolar  capillary  column  and  set  to  monitor 
m/z 313,  357,  and  372  from  the  derivative  and  360  and  375 from its deuterated analog.  Ion ratios obtained from 
samples are compared with those obtained from calibration standards to determine the concentration of THC-9-COOH 
in the sample.  Each laboratory analyzed one vial of each level of SRM 1507b. 
 
GC/MS/MS Analysis:  Five vials of the low level, and three vials of the medium level were analyzed.  The entire 
contents  of  each  vial  of  the  reconstituted  urine  were  spiked  with  the  labeled  internal  standard  and  processed  by  a 
solid-phase  extraction  cartridge  using  a  mixed-mode  retention  mechanism  of  ion  exchange  and  reverse  phase  to 
isolate the THC-9-COOH from the urine.  The THC-9-COOH was converted to its tert-butyldimethylsilyl derivative 
for analysis. 
 
The GC/MS/MS measurements were performed using a 30 m nonpolar fused silica capillary column interfaced to a 
triple quadrupole mass spectrometer.  Electron ionization was used to generate molecular ions, m/z 572 and 575 for 
the  unlabeled  and  labeled  forms,  respectively,  which  were  subjected  to  collisions  with  argon  in  the  middle 
quadrupole.    The  quadrupoles  were  operated  in  the  neutral  loss  mode,  with  loss  of  57  monitored  for  both  ions. 
Analyte concentrations were calculated by linear interpolation from calibration curves constructed for the analyte. 
 
LC Analysis:  Four sets of SRM 1507b (consisting of one vial each of the two THC-9-COOH levels) were analyzed. 
Urine  samples  were  reconstituted  and  spiked  with  an  internal  standard  solution  of  ∆8-THC  in  methanol.    The 
contents  of  each  bottle  were  extracted  using  a  commercially  available  solid-phase  extraction  cartridge  specifically 
designed for extraction of THC-9-COOH from urine.  THC-9-COOH and ∆8-THC were eluted from the cartridge with 
methanol. 
 
THC-9-COOH  was  determined  using  a  reversed-phase  LC  separation  performed  on  a  Zorbax1 C18 column  with 
gradient  elution.    Phosphoric  acid  was  added  to  both water and acetonitrile (ACN) components (1.00 mL of 85 % 
phosphoric  acid  per  liter  of  solvent).    The  following  program  was  employed:    step (1)  equilibration  with 
50:50 ACN:H2O for 7.5 min; step (2) injection; step (3) linear gradient from initial conditions to 100 % ACN over 
30 min; step (4) hold at 100 % ACN for 15 min; step (5) linear gradient from 100 % ACN to 50:50 ACN-H2O over 
2 min.    Column  temperature  was  fixed  at  40 °C,  and  mobile  phase  flow  rate  was  2 mL/min.    Measurements  were 
carried  out  using  UV  detection  at  210 nm.    Urine  standards  and  SRM 1507b  samples  were  processed  identically 
using the method described above.  Samples and standards were run alternately throughout the analysis procedure.  A 
linear regression fit (using peak areas) was made of the urine standards, and the concentrations of THC-9-COOH in 
SRM 1507b samples were calculated from the regression line. 

SRM 1507b 

Page 3 of 4 

  The 

samples  were 

spiked  with  an 

LC/MS  Analysis:    Stability  measurements  for  this  SRM  have  been  performed  using  a  method  based  on  isotope-
dilution  LC/MS [3]. 
standard,  
5'-d3-11-nor-delta-9-THC-9-carboxylic acid and processed using C18 solid-phase extraction cartridges to isolate the 
THC-9-COOH from the urine. After the solvent from the extraction was evaporated, the residue was dissolved in the 
mobile phase used for the LC/MS (40 mM ammonium acetate in methanol:water [80:20]). 
 
A commercial LC/MS instrument with an electrospray ionization source and a quadrupole mass analyzer was used 
for the analysis.  The LC separation was carried out using a commercial C-18 column with an isocratic mobile phase 
at a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min.  Electrospray ionization in the negative ion mode was used to monitor the (M-H)− ions 
at m/z 343 and 346 for THC-9-COOH and its labeled internal standard, respectively.  Analyte concentrations were 
calculated by linear interpolation from calibration curves constructed for each set of samples. 

isotopically 

internal 

labeled 

 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  American  Chemical  Society;  Detection  in  Analytical  Chemistry  -  Importance,  Theory,  and  Practice; 

Currie, L.A., Ed; ACS Symposium Series: New York, Vol. 361, p. 10 (1988). 

[2]  Schiller, S.B.;  Eberhardt, K.R.;  Combining  Data  From 

Independent  Chemical  Analysis  Methods; 

Spectrochemica Acta, Vol. 46B, No. 12, pp. 1607−1613 (1991). 

[3]  Tai, S.S.C.;  Welch, M.J.;  Determination  of  11-Nor-Delta-9-Tetrahydrocannabinal-9-carboxylic  Acid  in  a 
Urine-based Standard Reference Material by Isotope Dilution-Liquid Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry with 
Electrospray Ionization; J. Anal. Toxicol., Vol. 24, pp. 385−389 (2000). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Certificate Revision History:  14 December 2016 (Change of expiration date; editorial changes); 25 May 2011 (Extension of certification period; 
editorial changes); 05 January 2009 (Extension of certification period.); 01 December 2004 (This revision reflects the decertification and removal of 
the  high  level  material);  29 September 2003  (This  revision  establishes  an  expiration  date based upon a reanalysis of the SRM that demonstrated 
stability of THC-9-COOH in the material.); 01 February 1999 (This revision establishes an expiration date based upon a reanalysis of the SRM that 
demonstrated stability of THC-9-COOH in the material.); 16 November 1994 (Editorial changes); 12 May 1993 (This technical revision reports a 
correction in the certified data for all concentration levels.); 20 March 1992 (Original certificate date). 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This  can  be 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
e 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program:    telephone  (301)  975-2200;  fax  (301)  948-3730;  e-mail 
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

possession  is  current. 
948- 

301) 

 

; 

- 

SRM 1507b 

Page 4 of 4 

