National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material 1543 
 
GC/MS System Performance Standard 
 
This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  evaluating  the  sensitivity  of  gas 
chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) instrumentation.  A unit of SRM 1543 consists of four solutions: two 
concentrations of methyl stearate in hexane and two concentrations of benzophenone in hexane. 
 
Certified  Concentrations  of  Constituents:    The  certified  concentration  values  and  estimated  uncertainties  given 
below are based on gravimetric values from the preparation of the solutions and on analytical values determined by 
gas chromatography.  These values are valid between 18 °C and 28 °C.  No evidence of sample heterogeneity was 
observed.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy in that all 
known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [1].  
 

Certified Mass Concentration Values for SRM 1543 

Compound 
 

Concentration(a) 
(ng/µL) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) The certified values, expressed as the value ± the expanded uncertainty, are valid between 18 °C and 28 °C.  The certified value 
is  the  average  of  the  concentrations  determined  by  gravimetric  and  chromatographic  measurements.    The  expanded  95 % 
uncertainty  uses  a  coverage  factor  of  2  and  includes  correction  for  estimated  purity,  allowance  for  differences  between  the 
concentration determined by gravimetric preparation and chromatographic measurements, and an allowance for the use of this 
SRM  between  18 °C  and  28 °C [2].    The  measurand  is  the  mass  concentration  for  each  compound  listed.    Metrological 
traceability is to the SI derived unit for mass concentration (expressed as nanograms per microliter). 

Methyl Stearate (low) 
Methyl Stearate (high) 
Benzophenone (low) 
Benzophenone (high) 

0.99  ±  0.02 
4.98  ±  0.08 
1.01  ±  0.02 
5.01  ±  0.07 

 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 1543 is valid indefinitely, within the uncertainty specified, 
until 31 May 2036, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with the instructions given in this certificate 
(see  “Instructions  for  Handling,  Storage,  and  Use”).    The  certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is  damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical changes occur that affect the certification, NIST will notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet 
or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  the  certification  of  this  SRM  was  performed  by 
B.A. Benner, Jr. of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Preparation  and  analytical  measurements  of  the  SRM  were  performed  by  J.M. Brown-Thomas,  R.G. Christensen, 
L.R. Hilpert, R.E. Rebbert, and L.T. Sniegoski of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Statistical analysis of the data was performed by R.C. Paule of the former NBS National Measurement Laboratory. 
 

NIST

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 
 
Steven J. Choquette, Acting Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Page 1 of 2 

Gaithersburg, MD  20899  
Certificate Issue Date: 28 July 2016 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

  

SRM 1543 

coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
ING,  STORAGE,  AND  USE 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
Handling:  This material should be handled with care.  Use proper disposal methods. 
 
Storage:  Sealed ampoules, as received, should be stored in the dark at temperatures between 10 °C and 30 °C. 
 
nple  aliquots  for 
Use:  Ampoules should be brought to a temperature between 18 °C and 28 °C before opening.  Sample aliquots for 
analysis should be withdrawn immediately after opening the ampoules and should be processed without delay for the 
certified values to be valid within the stated uncertainty. The volume used should be at least 0.1 µL, and a syringe 
appropriate to the volume to be measured should be chosen.  Care should be taken to minimize evaporation of the 
solvent.  Because storage conditions may affect the concentration, certified values are not applicable to material stored 
after opening even if stored in resealed containers. 
 
 

3  between  10 

8 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of 
for 
Reference  Materials 
260-136, 
U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (2000);  
available at http://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF (accessed July 2016). 

Chemical  Measurements;  NIST 

Publication 

Special 

[2]  JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data − Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(GUM 1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology (JCGM)  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  July 2016);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note  1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed July 2016). 

  
ditorial  changes   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certificate Revision History:  28 July 2016 (Change of expiration date; editorial changes); 15 August 1984 (Original certificate date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This  can  be
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by 
(301) 948-3730; 
telephone 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

contacting 

fax 

SRM 1543 

Page 2 of 2 

