National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material® 1548a 
 
Typical Diet 
 
This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  validating  analytical  methods  for  the 
determination of proximate content and minor and trace constituent elements in mixed diets and food matrices.  The 
base material used for SRM 1548a originated from food menus used for metabolic studies performed at the USDA 
Beltsville Human Nutrition Research Center.  SRM 1548a is a blended freeze-dried homogenate of these menus.  This 
SRM may also be used for quality assurance when assigning values to in-house control materials.  SRM 1548a Typical 
Diet  is  the  renewal  for  SRM 1548  Total  Diet.    A  unit  of  SRM 1548a  consists  of  two  bottles,  each  containing 
approximately 6.5 g of the freeze-dried homogenate of mixed diet foods. 
 
Certified Mass Fraction Values:  The certified mass fraction values for the minor elements and several trace elements 
are  provided  in  Tables 1  and 2,  respectively.    A  NIST  certified  value  is  a  value  for  which  NIST  has  the  highest 
confidence  in  its  accuracy  in  that  all  known  or  suspected  sources  of  bias  have  been  investigated  or  taken  into 
account [1].  Values were derived from the combination of results provided by NIST and collaborating laboratories 
(Appendices A, B, and C).  Values are reported on a dry mass basis in mass fraction units [2]. 
 
Reference Mass Fraction Values:  Reference mass fraction values for four trace elements (Table 3), proximates and 
calories (Table 4), which were derived from results reported by collaborating laboratories.  The reference values are 
noncertified values that do not meet NIST criteria for certification and are provided with associated uncertainties that 
may reflect only measurement precision, may not include all sources of uncertainty, or may reflect a lack of sufficient 
statistical agreement among multiple methods.  Explanations in support of each reference value are given as a note in 
each table.  Values are reported on a dry-mass basis in mass fraction units. 
 
Information Mass Fraction Values:  Information mass fraction values for additional trace elements are provided in 
Table 5.  These are noncertified values with no uncertainties reported as there is insufficient information to make an 
assessment  of  the  uncertainties.    The  information  values  are  given  to  provide  additional  characterization  of  the 
material.  Information values cannot be used to establish metrological traceability. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 1548a is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until  30 April 2021,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this 
certificate (see “Instructions for Storage and Use”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, 
or otherwise modified. 
 
Tf  substantive 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination of technical measurements leading to certification of this SRM were performed by R.R. Greenberg of 
the NIST Chemical Sciences Division and G.V. lyengar of the International Atomic Energy Agency. 
 
Coordination of the material preparation was under the direction of W.R. Wolf of the U.S. Department of Agriculture 
(USDA), Beltsville, MD. 
 
Analytical  measurements  at  NIST  were  performed  by  D.A. Becker,  R. Demiralp,  K. Garrity,  R.R. Greenberg, 
G.V. Iyengar,  R.M. Lindstrom,  S.E. Long,  E.A. Mackey,  B.R. Norman,  R.L. Paul,  M.S. Rearick,  L. Tandon, 
G.C. Turk, and L.J. Wood of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  18 November 2015 
Certificate Revision History on Page 6 

Robert. L Watters, Jr., Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

this  SRM  were  performed  by  R.R. 

ion  and  G.V.

 

Page 1 of 9 

  

SRM 1548a 

RESEARCH 

Analytical measurements for value assignment were performed by NIST and the following collaborating laboratories:  
the  Centers  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention/Nutrition  Biochemistry  Branch,  Atlanta,  GA;  Food  and  Drug 
Administration/Atlanta Center for Nutrient Analysis, Atlanta, GA; Perkin-Elmer Corporation, Norwalk, CT; USDA 
Beltsville  Human  Nutrition  Research  Center/Food  Composition  Laboratory  and  Vitamin  and  Mineral  Nutrition 
Laboratory, Beltsville, MD; University of Ljubljana/Laboratory for Radiochemistry, Ljubljana, Slovenia; University 
of  Massachusetts  at  Amherst/Department  of  Chemistry,  Amherst,  MA;  and  Virginia  Polytechnic  and  State 
University/Department of Biochemistry and Anaerobic Microbiology, Blacksburg, VA.  In addition, the following 
three  contract  laboratories  provided  confirmatory  analysis  for  proximate  contents:    Covance  Laboratories,  Inc. 
(formerly  Corning  Hazleton)  Madison,  WI,  Lancaster  Laboratories,  Lancaster,  PA,  and  Medallion  Laboratories, 
Minneapolis, MN.  
 
Statistical analysis was provided by L.M. Gill of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Office  of  Reference 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
NOTICE AND WARNING TO USERS 
 
SRM 1548a IS INTENDED FOR RESEARCH USE; NOT FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION. 
 
STORAGE  AND  USE 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage:  SRM 1548a should be stored under refrigeration at a temperature between 2 °C and 8 °C in its original 
container and tightly capped.  It should NOT be exposed to intense direct light or ultraviolet radiation. 
 
of  sample  to  air  should  be  minimized 
Use:  Allow the bottle to come to ambient temperature before opening.  Exposure of sample to air should be minimized 
and any unused portion stored as described under “Storage”.  Before each use, the contents of the bottle should be 
well mixed by gently shaking and rolling the container.  The recommended minimum sample mass for analysis of this 
SRM is 250 mg for most minor and trace elements.  Residual moisture content should be determined on a separate 
sample for conversion of analytical results to a dry mass basis.  The recommended drying method is freeze-drying.  If 
freeze-drying is not available, the sample should be vacuum dried at a temperature not to exceed 25 °C for 24 h.  The 
observed moisture content ranges from 1 % to 15 % (mass fraction).  Due to high fat content of this material, excessive 
drying times and elevated temperatures will lead to loss of volatile lipid components and an incorrect estimation of 
dry mass. 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS 
 
Preparation:  This SRM was prepared from menus used for the metabolic studies at the Human Study Facility of the 
USDA Beltsville Human Nutrition Research Center.  Food items in prescribed quantities representing a four-day menu 
of  the
cycle were pooled/combined into a master menu.  Enough foods were acquired to prepare a sufficient quantity of the 
diet composite.  The material was freeze-dried, pulverized, sieved, and radiation sterilized at a dose of 2.5 mrad 
to prevent bacterial growth.  The resulting product was blended, bottled, and sealed under nitrogen. 
 
Homogeneity:  Due to the substantial fat content in this pooled material and the simplified processing steps adopted 
during the preparation, the final product is not a free flowing powder.  Nevertheless, for major matrix components 
(e.g.,  fat  and  protein),  the  blend  is  homogeneous.    The  degree  of  homogeneity  observed  for  elements  at  different 
concentration  levels,  corresponds  to  what  is  practically  attainable  for  such  multicomponent  solid  mixtures  and, 
therefore, the material is also considered to be sufficiently homogeneous for minor and trace elements. 

frigeration  at  a  temperature  between  2 

NOT 

SRM 1548a 

 

Page 2 of 9 

NIST Analyses for Minor and Trace Elements 
 
NIST analyses were performed by neutron activation analysis and mass spectrometry using appropriate combinations 
as shown in Appendix C.  At least six independent determinations were made for each analyte.  With the exception of 
phosphorus (two determinations each from three bottles) the remaining assays represent results obtained by analyzing 
6 to 12 bottles for all other analytes.  The amount of sample used for each determination varied depending upon the 
method of analysis.  In most cases, the sample masses ranged from 0.25 g to 1 g, with the exception of cadmium and 
lead  by  isotope  dilution  mass  spectrometry  where  1 g  to  2 g  samples  were  used,  and  iodine  by  neutron  activation 
analysis following pre-irradiation combustion separation where up to 2.5 g samples were used. 
 
Collaborating Laboratories' Analyses for Proximate Constituents and Minor and Trace Elements 
 
Proximate contents (ash, fat, nitrogen/protein, and solids) were determined by several laboratories (see Appendix A 
and Appendix B).  At least six independent determinations were made for each analyte, with the exception of two 
contract laboratories, which carried out two determinations each from three bottles.  The amount of sample used varied 
from 1 g to 3 g depending upon the analyte.  AOAC Official Methods [3] were used for the determination of nitrogen, 
fat, ash, and solids as listed in Appendix B. 
 
For  the  determination  of  minor  and  trace  elements,  flame  atomic  absorption  spectrophotometry,  graphite  furnace 
atomic  emission  spectrophotometry,  inductively  coupled  plasma  mass  spectrometry,  inductively  coupled  plasma 
spectrometry,  and  neutron  activation  analysis  (radiochemical)  were  used  by  various  laboratories.    At  least  six 
independent determinations  were  made for each analyte.   The amount of sample  used varied from 0.25 g to 0.5 g 
depending upon the method used, with the exception of one laboratory that used 2.5 g to prepare the matrix stock 
solution for assay by multiple modes of a given technique. 
 
Value Assignment:  The participating laboratories reported a minimum of six determinations based on six separate 
measurements (with two exceptions as mentioned under analyses carried out at NIST and collaborating laboratories).  
All laboratories used specified controls to validate the methods and reported their results for such control material 
analysis.  All assigned values are the equally weighted means of the measurements for a given analyte made by NIST 
and by collaborating laboratories reporting results.  The associated uncertainties are expanded at the 95 % level of 
confidence with a bias adjustment for differences between methods [1,4]. 
 
 

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fraction Values for Minor Elements(a) 
 

Values

 

Element 

Mass Fraction  
  (mg/kg) 

 
1967 
12078 
580 
3486 
6970 
8132 
1928 

± 
± 
± 
± 
± 
± 
± 

113 
356 
27 
245 
125 
942 
150 

Calcium 
Chlorine 
Magnesium 
Phosphorus 
Potassium 
Sodium 
Sulfur 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a) 
(a)  Each  certified  mass  fraction  value  is  an  equally  weighted  mean  from  the  combination  of  results  provided  by  NIST  and 
collaborating laboratories.  The uncertainty in the certified mass fraction values is expressed as an expanded uncertainty, U, 
which  is  calculated  as,  U = kuc  +  B.    The  combined  standard  uncertainty,  uc,  is  calculated  according  to  the  ISO/JCGM 
Guides [1],  which  accounts  for  the  combined  effect  of  the  within  variance  for  all participating  laboratories  at  one  standard 
deviation.  The coverage, k, is determined from the Student's t-distribution corresponding to the appropriate associated degrees 
of freedom and 95 % confidence for each analyte.  B is a bias adjustment for the difference between methods, which is the 
maximum difference between the certified value and method means [4].  The measurand is the total mass fraction value for 
each analyte listed.  Metrological traceability is to the SI derived unit for mass fraction (expressed as milligrams per kilogram). 

SRM 1548a 

 

Page 3 of 9 

Table 2.  Certified Mass Fraction Values for Trace Elements(a) 

Values 

 

 

72.4 

35.3 

Element 

Mass Fraction  
(mg/kg) 

0.20 
0.035 
0.0098 
2.32 

Aluminum 
Arsenic(b) 
Cadmium 
Cesium 
Copper 
Iron 
Iodine 
Manganese 
Nickel 
Lead 
Selenium 
Tin 
Zinc 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Each certified mass fraction value (with the exception of the one for arsenic) is an equally weighted mean from the combination 
of results provided by NIST and collaborating laboratories.  The uncertainty in the certified mass fraction values is expressed as 
an expanded uncertainty, U, which is calculated as U = kuc + B.  The combined standard uncertainty, uc, is calculated according 
to the ISO/JCGM Guides [1], which accounts for the combined effect of the within variance for all participating laboratories at 
one  standard  deviation.    The  coverage,  k,  is  determined  from  the  Student's  t-distribution  corresponding  to  the  appropriate 
associated degrees of freedom and 95 % confidence for each analyte.  B is a bias adjustment for the difference between methods, 
which is the maximum difference between the certified value and method means [4].  The measurand is the total mass fraction 
value for each analyte listed.  Metrological traceability is to the SI derived unit for mass fraction (expressed as milligrams per 
kilogram). 

±  1.52 
±  0.01 
±  0.0015 
±  0.0003 
±  0.16 
±  3.77 
±  0.103 
±  0.17 
±  0.023 
±  0.009 
±  0.028 
±  2.57 
±  1.79 

0.759 
5.75 
0.369 
0.044 
0.245 

17.2 
24.6 

(b) The certified value for arsenic is based on NIST measurements and its uncertainty has been expanded by a coverage factor of  
k = 4.  The measurand is the certified mass fraction value for arsenic.  Metrological traceability is to the SI derived unit for mass 
fraction (expressed as milligrams per kilogram). 

 
The mass fraction values in Table 3 are provided as reference values because the results were not confirmed by an 
independent analytical technique or a definitive method as required for NIST certification. 
 
 

a)
Table 3.  Reference Mass Fraction Values for Trace Elements(a) 

Values 

a) 

(mg/kg) 

Mass Fraction(a)  

Element 
 

Boron(b) 
Barium 
Molybdenum 
Strontium 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a) 
(a)  Each  reference  mass  fraction  value  is  an  equally  weighted  mean  from  the  combination  of  results  provided  by  NIST  and 
collaborating laboratories.  The uncertainty in the reference mass fraction values is expressed as an expanded uncertainty, U, 
which is calculated as U = kuc + B.  The combined standard uncertainty, uc is calculated according to the ISO/JCGM Guides [1], 
which accounts for the combined effect of the within variance for all participating laboratories at one standard deviation.  The 
coverage, k, is determined from the Student's t-distribution corresponding to the appropriate associated degrees of freedom and 
95 % confidence for each analyte listed.  B is a bias adjustment for the difference between methods, which is the maximum 
difference between the certified value and method means [4].  The measurand is the total mass fraction value for the elements 
based on the methods used by NIST and the collaborating laboratories.  Metrological traceability is to the SI derived unit for 
mass fraction (expressed as milligrams per kilogram). 

4.16     ±   0.04 
  ±   0.10  
1.1  
0.260    ±   0.017 
2.93      ±   0.10 

») 
(b)  The measurand is the reference mass fraction value for boron based on NIST measurements only.  Metrological traceability is 

to the SI derived unit for mass fraction (expressed as milligrams per kilogram). 

SRM 1548a 

 

Page 4 of 9 

The mass fraction values in Table 4 are provided as reference values because the results have not been confirmed by 
an independent analytical technique or by a definitive method as required for NIST certification.  These reference 
values should be useful for comparison with results obtained using similar procedures (i.e., AOAC methods). 
 

Table 4.  Reference Mass Fraction Values for Proximates and Calories 

   

Analyte 
 

4.042  ±  0.164 

58.36 
19.41 
3.03 
18.08 
4.31 

a) 
  Mass Fraction(a)
(%) 
 

Ash 
Carbohydrate(b) 
Fat (total) 
Nitrogen 
Protein(c) 
Total Dietary Fiber 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a) 
(a) Each matrix component reference value, expressed as a mass fraction of the material (dry mass basis) is an equally weighted 
mean from the combination of results provided by NIST (for nitrogen), collaborating laboratories and contract laboratories listed 
in Appendices A and B, respectively.  The uncertainty in the reference value is expressed as an expanded uncertainty, U, which 
is calculated as U = kuc + B.  The combined standard uncertainty, uc is calculated according to the ISO and NIST Guides [1], 
which accounts for the combined effect of the within variance for all participating laboratories at one standard deviation.  The 
coverage, k, is determined from the Student's t-distribution corresponding to the appropriate associated degrees of freedom and 
95 % confidence for each analyte.  B is a bias adjustment for the difference between methods, which is the maximum difference 
between the certified value and method means [4].  The measurand is the reference mass fraction values for each analyte listed 
based on an independent analytical technique or by a definitive method.  Metrological traceability is to the SI derived unit for 
mass fraction (expressed as a percent). 

±  1.53 
±  1.45 
±  0.31 
±  0.42 
±  0.21 

±  8.11 kcal/100 g 

Calories(d) 

481.0 

») 
(b) Calculated by difference. 
(c) Calculated:  a factor of 6.25 was used to convert nitrogen to protein. 
)
(d) The  measurand  is  the  reference  mass  fraction  value  for  calories  is  based  on  the  mean  of  individual  calculations  from  the 
laboratories reporting results.  Metrological traceability is to the SI derived unit for calories (expressed as kilocalories be gram).  
If the mean proximate content values are used for calculation, with caloric equivalents of 9, 4, and 4 for fat, carbohydrate, and 
protein, respectively, the mean caloric content is 480.5 kcal/100 g. 

 
For Methods see Appendix B. 
 
The mass fraction values in Table 5 are provided as information values due to a larger than expected variability of 
results among laboratories and/or are derived from analyses performed by a single method. 
 
 

Table 5.  Information Mass Fraction Values for Trace Elements 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Analyte 
 

Antimony 
Bromine 
Cobalt 
Mercury 
Silicon 
Scandium 
Titanium 
 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.009 
9.64 
0.028 
0.005 

78.7 

0.0008 
4.7 

SRM 1548a 

 

Page 5 of 9 

REFERENCES 

 
[1] 

JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections); Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (JCGM) (2008); available at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Nov 2015);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results; NIST Technical Note 1297; U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (1994); available at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/tn1297/index.cfm (accessed Nov 2015). 

[2]  Thompson, A.;  Taylor, B.N.;  Guide  for  the  Use  of  the  International  System  of  Units  (SI);  NIST  Special 
at 

Publication 811;  U.S.  Government 
Printing  Office:  Washington, DC 
http://www.nist.gov/customcf/get_pdf.cfm?pub_id=200349 (accessed Nov 2015). 

available 

(2008); 

[3]  AOAC International Official Methods of Analysis, 16th ed., AOAC International: Gaithersburg, MD (1995). 
[4]  Schiller,  S.B.;  Eberhardt,  K.E.;  Combining  Data  from  Independent  Analysis  Methods;  Spectrochimica  Acta, 

Vol. 46B, No. 12, pp. 1607−1613 (1991). 

[5]  Official Methods of Analysis, 15th ed., AOAC International:  Gaithersburg, MD (1990). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
Certificate Revision History:  18 November 2015 (Change of expiration date; editorial changes); 15 April 2009 (This revision reports an extension 
of the expiration date and editorial changes); 22 March 2007 (Correction to Barium value); 26 October 2004 (Update of expiration date); 02 April 
2003 (Update of expiration date); 07 June 2001 (Editorial changes); 01 June 2000 (Update of expiration date); 02 February 1998 (Original certificate 
date). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting 
(301) 948-3730; 
telephone 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 
 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

http://www.nist

fax 

 

SRM 1548a 

 

Page 6 of 9 

APPENDIX A 
 
Measurements by Collaborating Laboratories 

Method(s) 

Graphite Furnace Atomic Absorption 
Spectrophotometry, 
Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass 
Spectrometry 

Analytes 

Cd, Ni, Pb 

Al, Cd, Ni, Pb 

AOAC Official Methods 
(See Appendix B) 
 
Kjeldahl  

 

 

Proximate content 

N 

Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic 
 
Emission Spectrophotometry 
 
 

 

 

 

Al, B, Ba, Ca, 
K, Mn, Na, Ni, 
P, S, Sn, Zn 

 

AOAC Official Methods(a)  
Flame Atomic Absorption   
 
Spectrophotometry 

Total Dietary Fiber  
Ca, Cu, Fe, K, 
Mg, Mn, Na, Zn 

Flame Atomic Absorption  
Spectrophotometry 

Cu, Fe, Zn 

Radiochemical Neutron 
Activation Analysis 
 
 

 

 

 

I 

Inductively Coupled Plasma 
Mass Spectrometry 
 
 

 
 

 

Inductively Coupled Plasma 
Atomic Emission  
Spectrophotometry 

 
 

AOAC Official Methods 
(See Appendix B) 

 

Al, As, Ba, Cs, 
Cu, Mn, Mo, 
Se, Sn, Sr, Zn 

Al, Ba, Ca, Fe, K, 
Mg, Mn, Na, P, 
S, Si, Sr, Ti, Zn 

Proximate content 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
Laboratory/Analyst(s) 
 
Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, Division of 
Environmental Laboratory 
Health Science; Atlanta, GA  
D.C. Paschal 
 
Food and Drug Administration 
Atlanta Center for Nutrient 
Analysis; Atlanta, GA 
 
K. Dodson 
 
Perkin-Elmer Corporation;  
 
Norwalk, CT 
K. Barnes 
 
 
 
USDA Beltsville Human 
Nutrition Research Center;  
Beltsville, MD 
 
Food Composition Laboratory 
N. Miller-Ihli 
B. Li 
 
Vitamin and Mineral Laboratory 
C. Veillon 
C. Patterson 
 
University of Ljubljana 
Radiochemistry Laboratory,  
Ljubljana, Slovenia 
A.R. Byrne 
 
University of Massachusetts 
Department of Chemistry;  
Amherst, MA 
 
R. Barnes 
A. Krushevska 
 
 
 
Virginia Polytechnic and 
State University, Department 
of Biochemistry; Blacksburg, VA 
K.M. Phillips 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

a)
(a) AOAC Method 991.43 [5] 

SRM 1548a 

 

Page 7 of 9 

APPENDIX B 
 
Measurements by Contract Laboratories using AOAC Official Methods of Analysis 
 

 

 

Laboratory/Analyst(s) 
 
Covance Laboratories Inc.  
 
(formerly Corning Hazelton Inc.,);   
 
 
Madison, WI 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

Lancaster Laboratories; 
Lancaster, PA 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

Method(s) 

 

Kjeldahl  
 
Extraction 
 
 
Muffle Furnace 
Vacuum Drying   
 
 
 

 
Kjeldahl  
 
Extraction 
Muffle Furnace 
 
Vacuum Drying   

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

(a) AOAC Methods 2.4.03 and 32.2.03 [2] 
(b) AOAC Methods 922.06, 954.02 [5] 
(c) AOAC Methods 32.1.05 [2] 
(d) Solids (Following moisture determination by vacuum drying for 24 h at 25 °C) 
(e) TDF AOAC Method 985.29 [5] 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

Analytes 

Nitrogen/Protein (a) 
Total Fat(b) 
Ash (c) 
Solids (d) 
2)
Total Dietary Fiber(e) 

a) 
Nitrogen/Protein(a) 
Total fat(b) 
Ash(c) 
Solids(d) 

SRM 1548a 

 

Page 8 of 9 

APPENDIX C 
 
NIST Measurements, Analytical Chemistry Division 

 

Method(s) 
 
Isotope Dilution Mass Spectrometry 
using Inductively Coupled Plasma-MS 
Inductively Coupled Plasma-MS 
Instrumental Neutron Activation 
 
 
Prompt Gamma-Ray Activation 
Pre-concentration Neutron Activation Analysis 
Radiochemical Neutron Activation   
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

Analytes 

Cd, Mg, Pb, Ni 

Mo 
Al, Ca, Cl, Co, Cr, 
Cs, Fe, K, Mg, Na, 
Sc, Se, Sn, Zn 
B, Cl, K, N, Na, S 
I 
As, Cd, Cu, Hg, 
Sb, Se, Sn, P 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

SRM 1548a 

Page 9 of 9 

