 
A

 
 
*
y
 
i
r
C
o

 
)

 
i

 
a

National  Institute  of  Standards  &  Technology 

Certificate  of  Analysis 

Standard  Reference  Material  1567a  _ 

Wheat  Flour 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  calibrating  instruments  and  evaluating  the 
reliability  of  analytical  methods  for  the  determination  of  minor  and  trace  elements  in  wheat  flour  and  similar  agricul- 
tural  food  products. 

Certified  Concentrations  of  Constituent  Elements:  The  certified  concentrations  of  the  constituent  elements  are 
shown in  Table  1.  Except  for  sulfur,  the  concentrations  are  based  on  results  obtained  by  two  or  more  independent, 
reliable  analytical  methods.  Non-certified  values  which  are  given  for  information  only,  appear  in  Table  2.  Sulfur 
is  certified  based  on  its  determination  by  a  definitive  method,  isotope  dilution  thermal  ionization  mass  spectrometry. 
All  values  are  based  on  a  minimum  sample  size  of  500  mg  and  are  reported  on  a  "dry  weight"  basis.  (See  "Instruc- 
tions  for  Drying”). 

Notice  and  Warnings  to  Users: 

Expiration  of Certification:  This  certification  will  be  invalid  after  5  years  from  the  date  of  shipping.  Should  it  be 
invalidated  before  then,  purchasers  will  be  notified  by  NIST. 

Storage:  The  material  should  be  kept in  its  original  bottle  and  stored  at  temperatures  between  10-30  °C.  It  should 
not  be  exposed  to  intense  sources  of  radiation,  including  ultraviolet  lamps  or  sunlight.  Ideally,  the  bottle  should 
be  kept  in  a  desiccator  in  the  dark  at  the  temperature  indicated. 

Use:  The  following  procedures  should  be  followed  to  relate  the  analytical  determinations  to  the  values  reported 
in  this  certificate.  The  bottle  should  be  shaken  well  before  each  use,  and  a  minimum  sample  of  500  mg  of  the 
material  should  be  used.  Mercury  should  be  determined  without  drying  and  the  concentration  values  adjusted  for 
the  moisture  content  of  the  material  using  separate  samples.  Other  elements  may  be  determined  either  on  samples 
without  drying  as  indicated  above  or  on  samples  vacuum-dried  for  24  hours  as  indicated  under  "Instructions  for 
. 
Drying." 

. 

Coordination  of  some  technical  measurements  leading  to  this  certificate  was  performed  by  M.S.  Epstein  of  the  In- 
organic  Analytical  Research  Division. 

Statistical  analysis  of  the  experimental  data  was  performed  by  K.R.  Eberhardt  of  the  NIST  Statistical  Engineering 
Division. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  Standard  Reference 
Material  were  coordinated  through  the  Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials  by  R.  Alvarez. 

September  8,  1988 
Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 
(Revision  of  certificate 
dated  10-23-87) 

. 

| 

Stanley  D.  Rasberry,  Chief 
Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials 

(over)

Table  1.  Certified  Concentrations  of  Constitutent  Elements* 

Minor  Constituents 

Trace  Constituents 

Element” 

Calcium’? 
Magnesium!#2*4 
Phosph 
Potassium” 
Ss 

Element” 

Aluminum*** 
Cadmium Tb  4b 
Cop  oe 
Iron 
ot  nese 
Molybdenum”>**# 
Rubidium!>44 
Selenium'** 
Sodium” 
Zinc laa 

Concentration, 
Percent  by  Weight® 

0.0191  +  0.0004 
0.040 
0.134 
0.133 
0.165 

+  0.002 
+  0.006 
+  0.003 
+  0.002 

Concentration,  yg/e 

5.7 
0.026 
2.1 
14.1, 
9.4 
0.48 
0.68 
Ld 
6.1 
11.6 

13 
0.002 
0,2 
0.5 
0.9 
0.03 
0.03 
0.2 
0.8 
0.4 

 
I
E

 
A
H

 
H
H
H

 
h

 
t
t

4  Analytical  values  are  based  on  the  "dry-weight"  of  material  (see  "Instructions  for  Drying”). 

b  Number  and  letter  code,  as  superscripts,  indicate  methods  used  for  certification.  (See  Analytical  Methods). 

©  The  certified  concentration  is  the  weighted  mean  computed  according  to  the  procedure  described  by  R.C.  Pauie  and  J.  Mandel  (NBS  Journal  of 
Research,  87,  1982,  pp.  377-385).  The  uncertainty  is  stated  as  a  95%  confidence  interval  plus  an  additional  allowance  for  systematic  erroramong 
the  methods  used.  The  allowance  for  systematic  error  is  the  greatest  difference  between  the  weighted  mean  and  the  component  means  for  the 
analytical  methods  used.  For  manganese,  an  additional  allowance  for  material  inhomogeneity is  inciuded,  so  that  the  uncertainty tepresents  a  95% 
expected  coverage  statistical  tolerance  interval. 

Analytical  Methods 

1.  Atomic  Absorption  Spectrometry 

a.  Flame 
b.  Graphite  Furnace 
c.  Hydride  Generation 

2.  Atomic  Emission  Spectrometry 

a.  DC  Plasma 
b.  Flame 
c.  Inductively  Coupled  Plasma 

3.  Mass  Spectrometry 

a.  Isotope  Dilution  Inductively  Coupled  Plasma 
b.  Isotope  Dilution  Thermal  Ionization 

4,  Neutron  Activation  Analysis  _ 

a.  Instrumental 
b.  Radiochemical 

5.  Spectrophotometry 

-2-

Table  2.  Noncertified  Concentrations  of  Constituent  Elements* 

NOTE:  The  values  shown  in  this  table  are  not  certified  because  they  are  not  based  on  the  results  of  either  two  or 
more  independent  reliable  methods  or  a  definitive  method  of  known  high  accuracy.  These  values  are  included  for 
information  only  and  therefore  no  uncertainty  limits  are  provided. 

Element 

Arsenic 
Bromine 
Chlorine 
Cobalt 
Iodine 
Lead 

Concentration, 
veg 
_ 

(0.006) 
(6) 
(565) 

(0.006) 
(0.0009) 
(<0.020) 

Trace  Constituents 

; 

Element 

Mercury 
Tin 
Tungsten 
Uranium 
Vanadium 

Concentration, 
ug/g 

| 

(0.0005) 
(0.0033) 
(0.0008) 
(0.0003) 
(0.011) 

9  Analytical  values  are  based  on  the  "dry-weight”  of  material  (see  "Instructions  for  Drying").  Mercury  should  be  determined  on  samples  without 
drying  and  the  results  adjusted  to  a  “dry-weight"  basis  by  determining  moisture  on  separate  samples. 

Preparation  of  Materjal:  The  wheat  flour  for  this  Standard  Reference  Material  was  described  by  the  supplier  as 
milled  from  a  blend  of  Hard  Red  Spring  and  Hard  Red  Winter  wheat  grown  primarily in  South  Dakota.  The  flour 
was  taken  from  the  mill  packer  during  the  middle  of  a  run  to  obtain  homogeneous  material.  The  flour  had  been 
bleached  and  brominated in  accordance  with  standard  treatments  for  commercial  bakery  use.  At  NIST,  the  material 
was  passed  through  a  sieve  with  openings  of  425  4m  (No.  40)  and  blended.  The  bottled  material  was  then  subjected 
to  2.5  megarads  of  Co-60  radiation  for  microbiological  control  at  Neutron  Products,  Inc.,  Dickerson,  Md. 

Homogeneity  Assessment:  Homogeneity  was  evaluated  by  instrumental  neutron  activation  using  samples  of  ap- 
proximately  500  mg  and  counting  the  radionuclidic  activities.  The  uncertainties  for  the  concentrations  in  Table  1 
include  these  results.. 

Instructions  for  Drying:  Except  for  mercury,  elements  should  be  determined  on  samples  which  have  been  dried  as 
follows:  vacuum-dry  the  material  at  approximately  25  °C  for  24  hours  at  a  pressure  not  greater  than  70  Pa  (0.5  mm 
Hg)  with  a  cold  trap  at  a  temperature  of  about  -30  °C  or  below. 

Mercury  should  be  determined  on  undried  samples.  However,  because  the  certificate  values  are  reported  on  a 
"dry-weight"  basis,  the  elemental  concentration  determined  on  undried  samples  should  be  adjusted  for  the  mois- 
ture  content  of  the  samples.  The  moisture  content,  which  was  approximately  9%  when  bottled,  should  be  deter- 
mined  on  separate  samples  by  the  vacuum-drying  procedure  described  above.  Samples  for  analysis  should  not  be 
oven-dried  lest  elements  be  lost  by  volatilization. 

Analysts,  Analytical  Chemistry  Division,  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology 

1,  ES.  Beary 
2.  T.A.  Butler 
3.  M.S.  Epstein 
4.  J.D.  Fassett 
5.  R.R.  Greenberg 
6.  L.B.  Jassie 
7.  W.R.  Kelly 
8.  H.M.  Kingston 

9. 
J.R.  Moody 
10.  PJ.  Paulsen 
11.  T.C.  Rains 
12.  T.A.  Rush 
13.  S.F.  Stone 
14,  R.L.  Watters,  Jr. 
15.  LJ.  Wood 
16.  L.J.  Yu,  Guest  Scientist 

Cooperating  Analysts 

N.J.  Miller-Ihhli,  Beltsville  Human  Nutrition  Center,  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture,  Beltsville,  Md. 
A.R.  Byme,  M.  Dermelj,  and  A.  Vakselj,  Institut  "Josef  Stefan"  Ljubljana,  Yugoslavia. 

-3-

