National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 1570a 

 

 
Trace Elements in Spinach Leaves 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  evaluating  the  reliability  of  analytical 
methods for the determination of major, minor, and trace elements in botanical materials, agricultural food products, 
and materials of similar matrix.  A unit of SRM 1570a consists of 60 g of finely powdered dried spinach leaves. 
 
Certified Mass Fraction Values:   Certified  mass  fraction  values  for selected constituent elements, reported on a 
dry-mass  basis,  are  provided  in  Table 1.    A  NIST  certified  value  is  a  value  for  which  NIST  has  the  highest 
confidence  in  its  accuracy  in  that  all  known  or  suspected  sources  of  bias  have  been  investigated  or  taken  into 
account [1]. 
 
Reference Mass Fraction Values:  Reference mass fraction values of constituent elements, reported on a dry-mass 
basis, are provided in Table 2.  Reference values are noncertified values that are the best estimates of the true values 
based on available data; however, the values do not meet  NIST criteria for certification [1] and are provided  with 
associated  uncertainties  that  may  reflect  only  measurement  reproducibility,  may  not  include  all  sources  of 
uncertainty, or may reflect a lack of sufficient statistical agreement among multiple analytical methods. 
 
Information  Mass  Fraction  Values:    Information  mass  fraction  values  for  additional  constituent  elements  are 
provided in Table 3.  A NIST information value is a value that may be of interest to the SRM user, but insufficient 
information is available to asses the uncertainty associated with the value, therefore no uncertainty is provided [1].  
Values are reported on a dry-mass basis. 
 
Expiration  of  Certification:    The  certification  of  SRM 1570a  is  valid,  within  the  measurement  uncertainty 
tiven 
specified, until 31 August 2023, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with the instructions given 
iged,
in  this  certificate  (see  “Instructions  for  Storage  and  Use”).    The  certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is  damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance  of  SRM  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If 
substantive technical changes occur that affect the certified values before the expiration of this certificate, NIST will 
notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination of analytical measurements for the characterization of this SRM was performed by D.A. Becker of the 
NIST Chemical Sciences Division.  Revision of this certificate was coordinated by K.E. Murphy, D.J. O’Kelly, and 
L.J. Wood of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Analytical  measurements  at  NIST  were  performed  by  current  and  former  staff  at  NIST,  E.S. Beary,  D.A. Becker, 
C.M. Beck II, M.S. Epstein, J.D. Fassett, K.M. Garrity, R.R. Greenberg, R.M. Lindstrom, E.A. Mackey, P. Morales, 
K.E. Murphy,  P.J. Paulsen,  B.J. Porter,  T.A. Rush,  R. Saraswati,  J.M. Smeller,  G.C. Turk,  R.D. Vocke, Jr., 
R.L. Watters, Jr., and L.J. Wood. 
 
Additional elemental analyses  were performed by D.L.  Anderson (Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration, College Park, MD), A.R. Byrne (Nuclear Chemistry Department, Jozef Stefan 
Institute,  Ljubljana,  Slovenia),  and  J. Kucera  (Nuclear  Physics  Institute,  Academy  of  Sciences  of  the  Czech 
Republic, Rez, Czech Republic).  Several elements were also measured in an International Atomic Energy Agency 
(IAEA, Vienna, Austria) interlaboratory comparison exercise. 
 

 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  25 February 2014 
Certificate Revision History on Page 5 

  

SRM 1570a 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Page 1 of 6 

Statistical  analysis  of  the  experimental  data  was  performed  by  W.F. Guthrie,  S.B. Schiller,  and  L.M. Gill  of  the 
NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage:   The  material  should  be  kept  in  its  tightly  closed  original  bottle  and  stored  in  the  dark  at  a  temperature 
between 10 °C and 30 °C.  It should not be exposed to intense sources of radiation.  Ideally, the bottle should be kept 
in a desiccator under the conditions indicated above.  Spinach leaves have a tendency to rapidly bleach and to turn a 
tan  or  light  brown  color  in  the  presence  of  visible  light.    By  monitoring  SRM 1570,  the  original  SRM,  it  was 
determined that there is no evidence of any change in elemental mass fractions as a result of the color change. 
 
Instructions for Use:  The contents of a bottle should be thoroughly mixed by rotating and/or rolling before each 
use.    Allow  the  contents  to  settle  for  1 minute  prior  to  opening  to  minimize  the  loss  of  fine  dust  particles.    A 
minimum sample mass of 150 mg of the material, dried as described in the section (see “Instructions for Drying”), 
should be used to relate analytical determinations to the certified values on this certificate.  In some cases, especially 
for volatile elements such as mercury, it is preferable to analyze samples from the bottle without drying, determine 
the moisture content on a separate sample from the same bottle taken at the same time, and convert the analytical 
results to a dry-mass basis. 
 
Digestion procedures should be designed to avoid loss of volatile elements, such as arsenic and mercury.  Digestion 
of  the  SRM  in  nitric  and  perchloric  acids  was  found  to  be  incomplete,  with  a  small  residue  of  siliceous  material 
remaining.    This  residue  must  be  considered  an  integral  part  of  this  SRM  and  should  be  dissolved  with  a  small 
amount of hydrofluoric acid to obtain total dissolution.  All certified values are based on the total dissolution. 
 
Instructions for Drying:  Samples of this SRM must be dried by one of the following two procedures in order for 
certified values to be valid: 
 
1.  Drying in a desiccator at room temperature (approximately 22 °C) for 120 h over fresh anhydrous magnesium 

perchlorate.  The sample depth should not exceed 1 cm. 

 
2.  Freeze-drying for 24 h at a pressure of 13.3 Pa or lower and a shelf temperature of –5 °C or lower after having 
frozen  the  sample  (not  to  exceed  1 cm  in  depth)  at  –40 °C  or  lower  for  at  least  1 h.    At  the  end  of  the  24 h 
period,  samples  should  be  placed  immediately  in  a  desiccator  with  fresh  anhydrous  magnesium  perchlorate.  
Samples should be weighed after allowing a minimum of 4 h to establish temperature equilibrium. 

 
Note:  An approximate mass loss on drying of 3.5 % was observed for the measurements reported here.  Vacuum 
drying  at  room  temperature  and  oven  drying  at  elevated  temperatures  have  resulted  in  excessive  mass  losses  and 
therefore are NOT recommended. 
 
SOURCE, PREPARATION, AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
Source  and  Preparation  of  Material:    The  material  (approximately  2270 kg)  for  this  SRM  was  obtained  from 
commercial  supplier  Oregon  Freeze-Drying  Corp.  (Albany, OR).    It  consists  of  U.S. Grade A  chopped  frozen 
spinach.    The  material  was  thawed,  placed  in  a  ribbon  mixer,  thoroughly  mixed,  and  blended.    After  mixing,  the 
spinach  was  freeze-dried.    The  freeze-dried  material  was  then  ground  in  a  stainless  steel  grinder  and  shipped  to 
NIST.  At NIST, the freeze-dried material was sieved through a polypropylene sieve having openings of 0.25 mm 
(equivalent  to  a  U.S. Series 60  standard  sieve).    The  sieved  material  was  then  jet  milled  and  air  classified  to  a 
particle size of approximately 75 µm (200 mesh).  After mixing in a large blender, the spinach was irradiated with 
cobalt-60  radiation  to  a  minimum  absorbed  dose  of  approximately  27.8 kGy  for  microbiological  control  and  was 
bottled. 
 

 

                                                 

(1)  Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental  procedure.    Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  National  Institute  of 
Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the 
purpose. 
SRM 1570a 

Page 2 of 6 

Elemental  Analysis:    Value  assignment  of  the  mass  fractions  of  the  elements  in  SRM 1570a  was  based  on  the 
combination of measurements from two or more different analytical methods at NIST and collaborating laboratories.  
NIST  and  collaborating  laboratories  provided  measurements  by  using  colorimetry (COLOR),  cold-vapor  atomic 
absorption spectrometry (CVAAS), flow injection hydride generation atomic absorption spectrometry (FI-HGAAS), 
inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP), isotope dilution inductively coupled plasma mass 
spectrometry (IDICPMS),  isotope  dilution  thermal  ionization  mass  spectrometry (IDTIMS),  instrumental  neutron 
activation  analysis (INAA),  laser-excited  atomic  fluorescence  spectrometry (LEAFS),  prompt  gamma  activation 
analysis (PGAA),  and  radiochemical  neutron  activation  analysis (RNAA).    Data  from  an  IAEA  interlaboratory 
comparison  exercise  were  also  used  where  available.    A  list  of  analytical  methods  used  for  measurement  of  each 
element is provided in Appendix A. 
 
Homogeneity Assessment:  Samples from randomly selected bottles of SRM 1570a were tested for homogeneity.  
No evidence of statistically significant inhomogeneity was observed. 
 
Certified Mass Fraction Values:  Certified mass fraction values are weighted means of results from two or more 
different analytical methods combined using the DerSimonian-Laird procedure [2].  The uncertainty in the certified 
mass fraction values was calculated according to the methods in Supplement 1 to the ISO/JCGM Guide [3] and the 
results are consistent with the methods given in the ISO/JCGM Guide [4].  The uncertainty of each certified value is 
expressed as U = kuc.  The quantity uc is the combined standard uncertainty, which accounts for the combined effect 
of within-method uncertainty from all potential sources and any bias between methods at the level of one standard 
deviation.  The coverage factor, k, is determined from the Student’s t-distribution corresponding to the appropriate 
associated degrees of freedom and a 95 % level of confidence for each analyte. 
 
The certified values are reported on a dry-mass basis.  For certified values to be valid, the material must be dried 
according  to  the  instructions  provided  above.    The  measurand  is  the  mass  fraction  of  the  element.    The  certified 
values are metrologically traceable to the SI unit of milligram per kilogram, expressed as percent. 
 
 
 

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fraction Values (Dry-Mass Basis) of Constituent Elements 

(Dry

Element 

 
Calcium 
Phosphorus 
Potassium 
Sodium 

Mass Fraction 
(%) 
 
  1.526  ±  0.066 
  0.5187  ±  0.0067 
  2.900  ±  0.026 
  1.821  ±  0.023 

Coverage Factor 
(k) 
 
2.0299 
1.9772 
2.3226 
1.9943 

Element 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

 

Element 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

 
 

 
 

Coverage 
Factor 
(k) 

 

2.0102 
2.0561 
2.0127 
2.0464 
2.0320 
2.0488 
1.9855 

±  15 

 
Aluminum 
Arsenic 
Boron 
Cadmium 
Cobalt 
Copper 
Manganese 

 
310 
  0.068  ± 
  37.7 
± 
  2.876  ± 
  0.393  ± 
  12.22  ± 
± 
  76.0 

0.012 
1.2 
0.058 
0.030 
0.86 
1.2 

 

 

 
  Mercury 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Nickel 
Selenium 
Strontium 
Thorium 
Vanadium 
Zinc 

 
  0.0297  ±  0.0021 
  2.142  ±  0.058 
  0.1152  ±  0.0043 
 55.54 
  0.0480  ±  0.0017 
  0.568  ±  0.017 
 82.3 

±  0.50 

±  3.9 

Coverage 
Factor 
(k) 
 
2.0492 
1.9709 
2.0371 
2.5029 
2.0053 
2.4938 
2.0136 

SRM 1570a 

Page 3 of 6 

Reference Mass Fraction Values:  Each reference value, expressed as a mass fraction on a dry-mass basis, is an 
equally  weighted  mean  of  results  provided  by  NIST  and/or  collaborating  laboratories.    The  uncertainty  in  the 
reference  mass  fraction  values  is  calculated  as  U = kuc.    The  quantity  uc  is  the  combined  standard  uncertainty 
calculated  according  to  the  ISO/JCGM  Guide [3,4],  which  accounts  for  the  combined  effect  of  within-method 
uncertainty  and  for  any  bias  between  methods  at  the  level  of  one  standard  deviation.    The  coverage  factor,  k,  is 
determined from the Student’s t-distribution corresponding to the appropriate associated degrees of freedom and a 
95 % level of confidence for each analyte. 
 
These reference values are reported on a dry-mass basis.  In order for these reference values to be valid, the material 
must be dried according to the instructions provided above.  The measurand is the mass fraction of the element as 
it  of  milligram 
determined by the method indicated.  The reference values are metrologically traceable to the SI unit of milligram 
per kilogram, expressed as percent. 
 

Table 2.  Reference Mass Fraction Values (Dry-Mass Basis) of Constituent Elements 
 

(Dry 

 

Element 
 
 

Mass Fraction 
(%) 

Nitrogen (Total) 

6.06  ±  0.20 

Element 
 

Europium 
Scandium 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

Element 
 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

0.0055  ±  0.0010 
0.0055  ±  0.0006 

Rubidium 
Uranium 

12.7  ±  1.6 

0.155 ±  0.023 

 
Information Mass Fraction Values:  Each information value, expressed as a mass fraction on a dry-mass basis, is 
an equally weighted mean of results provided by NIST and/or collaborating laboratories.  Insufficient information is 
available to asses the uncertainty associated with the value, therefore no uncertainty is provided. 
 
 

Table 3.  Information Mass Fraction Values (Dry-Mass Basis) of Constituent Elements 
 

(Dry

Element 
 

Magnesium 
Sulfur 

Element 
 
 
Lead 
 

Mass Fraction 
(%) 

0.9 
0.5 

0.2 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

SRM 1570a 

Page 4 of 6 

REFERENCE 
 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of 
Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260–136,  U.S.  Government 
Printing  Office:  Washington, DC (2000); 
at  http://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF 
(accessed Feb 2014). 

available 

[2]  DerSimonian, R;  Laird, N.;  Meta-Analysis  in  Clinical  Trials;  Controlled  Clin.  Trials,  Vol. 7,  pp. 177–188 

(1986). 

[3]  JCGM 101:2008;  Evaluation  of  Measurement  Data – Supplement 1  to  the  “Guide  to  the  Expression  of 
Uncertainty  in  Measurement” - Propagation  of  Distributions  using  a  Monte  Carlo  Method;  JCGM (2008); 
available at http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_101_2008_E.pdf (accessed Feb 2014). 
[4]  JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data - Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement; 
(GUM 1995  with  Minor  Corrections),  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Feb 2014);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297;  U.S. Government  Printing  Office:    Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed Feb 2014). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certificate  Revision  History:    25 February 2014  (Extension  of  certification  period;  updated  certified  values  and  uncertainties;  removed 
reference and information values for proximates, calories, total dietary fiber, fatty acids, and nitrogen (organic and protein) due to instability of 
organic constituents; editorial changes); 08 October 2008 (Update of expiration date; editorial changes); 31 August 2001 (This technical revision 
reports  the  addition  of  reference  and  information  values  for  proximates,  calories,  total  dietary  fiber,  and  fatty  acids  and  a  change  from  non-
certified to  reference  and information  values  for  several  inorganic constituents);  15 July 1996  (Editorial  changes);  20  October 1994  (Original 
certificate date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
(301) 948-3730; 
telephone 
accomplished  by  contacting 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

fax 

 

SRM 1570a 

Page 5 of 6 

APPENDIX A 
 
Methods Used in Elemental Determinations 
 

Element 
 
Aluminum (Al) 
 
 
Arsenic (As) 
 
 
Boron (B) 
 
 
Cadmium (Cd) 
 
 
 
Calcium (Ca) 
 
 
Cobalt (Co) 
 
 
 
Copper (Cu) 
 
 
Europium (Eu) 
 
 
Lead (Pb) 
 
 
Magnesium (Mg) 
 
 
Manganese (Mn) 
 
 
Mercury (Hg) 
 
 
Nickel (Ni) 
 

Method Code 
 
ICP 
INAA 
 
FI-HGAAS 
RNAA 
 
IDICPMS 
PGAA 
 
IDICPMS 
PGAA 
RNAA 
 
IDTIMS 
INAA 
 
INAA 
RNAA 
 
 
ICP 
RNAA 
 
IAEA 
INAA 
 
IAEA 
IDICPMS 
 
IDICPMS 
 
 
INAA 
LEAFS 
 
CVAAS 
RNAA 
 
IDICPMS 
RNAA 

Element 
 
Nitrogen (N) 
 
 
Phosphorus (P) 
 
 
Potassium (K) 
 
 
Rubidium (Rb) 
 
 
 
Scandium (Sc) 
 
 
Selenium (Se) 
 
 
 
Sodium (Na) 
 
 
Strontium (Sr) 
 
 
Sulfur (S) 
 
 
Thorium (Th) 
 
 
Uranium (U) 
 
 
Vanadium (V) 
 
 
Zinc (Zn) 
 

Method Code 
 
PGAA 
 
 
COLOR 
ICP 
 
IDTIMS 
INAA 
 
IAEA 
INAA 
 
 
IAEA 
INAA 
 
FI-HGAAS 
INAA 
RNAA 
 
PGAA 
INAA 
 
IDTIMS 
INAA 
 
PGAA 
IAEA 
 
INAA 
RNAA 
 
RNAA 
 
 
IDTIMS 
INAA 
 
ICP 
INAA 

  COLOR:  Colorimetry 
  CVAAS:  Cold-vapor atomic absorption spectrometry 

Key: 
 
 
atomic  absorption  spectrometry
  FI-HGAAS:  Flow injection hydride generation atomic absorption spectrometry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

IAEA:  Various methods from an IAEA interlaboratory comparison exercise. 
Inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry 
Isotope dilution inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry 
Isotope dilution thermal ionization mass spectrometry 
Instrumental neutron activation analysis 

LEAFS:  Laser-excited atomic fluorescence spectrometry 
PGAA:  Prompt gamma activation analysis 
RNAA:  Radiochemical neutron activation analysis 

 
 
ICP: 
  IDICPMS: 
IDTIMS: 
 
 
INAA: 
 
 
 

SRM 1570a 

Page 6 of 6 

