National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material 1598a 

 

Inorganic Constituents in Animal Serum 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is a serum sample derived from a mixture of serum from healthy bovine and 
porcine  animals  collected  under  strict  protocols  designed  to  preserve  the  original  composition  and  to  minimize 
contamination [1].  The SRM is intended primarily for use in calibrating instrumentation and evaluating the accuracy 
of  analytical  methods  for  selected  elements  in  blood  serum,  plasma,  and  similar  biological  fluids.    A  unit  of 
SRM 1598a consists of two capped polyethylene vials, each containing 5 mL to 6 mL of frozen serum.  
 
Certified  Concentration  Values:    Certified  values  for  concentrations  for  elements  are  provided  in  Table 1.   The 
certified values are based on results from either a primary analytical technique carried out at NIST, or the combined 
results from two or more chemically independent analytical techniques obtained at NIST and collaborating expert 
laboratories [2].  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy in that 
all known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or accounted for by NIST. 
 
Reference  Concentration  Values:    Reference  values  for  concentrations  for  additional  elements  are  provided  in 
Table 2.  Reference values are non-certified values that are the best estimate of the true value.  However, the values 
do not meet the NIST criteria for certification and are provided with associated uncertainties that may reflect only 
measurement  precision,  may  not  include  all  sources  of  uncertainty,  or  may  reflect  a  lack  of  sufficient  statistical 
agreement among multiple analytical methods [2].  
 
Information Concentration Values:  Information values for concentrations for elements are provided in Table 3. An 
information value is considered to be a value that will be of interest and use to the SRM user, but for which insufficient 
information  is  available  to  assess  adequately  the  uncertainty  associated  with  the  value,  or  a  value  derived  from  a 
limited number of analyses [2].  Information values cannot be used to establish metrological traceability. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 1598a is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until  01 October 2024, provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this 
certificate (see “Instructions for Handling, Storage, and Use”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified.  
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification.  
 
certification  of  this  material  was  under 
Coordination of the investigations and technical measurements leading to the certification of this material was under 
the leadership of R. Zeisler of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division.  
 
Collection and preparation of SRM 1598a were performed by C. Veillon, N. Bryden, D. Hill, and K. Patterson of the 
USDA Beltsville Agricultural Research Center. 
 
Consultation on the statistical design of the experimental work and evaluation of the data were provided by S.D. Leigh 
of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
ve  of  Reference
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD  20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  10 January 2017 
Certificate Revision History on Page 4 

Steven J. Choquette 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

Page 1 of 5 

  

SRM 1598a 

YDLING,  STORAGE,  AND 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
Handling:  This material is derived from a mixture of serum from healthy bovine and porcine animals.  These animals 
have been inspected by an USDA Veterinary Medical Officer and have not shown signs of infectious, contagious, 
and/or communicable disease.  Normal caution and care should be exercised during its handling and use.  The users 
should  be  aware  of  sources  of  contamination,  and  handling  in  an  at  least  Class  100  clean  air  environment  is 
recommended. 
 
Storage:    The  material  should  be  stored  in  its  original  container  at  −70  °C  or below.    SRM  1598a  should  not  be 
exposed to intense sources of radiation, including ultraviolet lamps or sunlight. 
 
Use:  After thawing, prior to removal of sub-samples for analysis, the contents of the vials should be mixed.  The 
concentrations of constituents in SRM 1598a are reported on a volume basis to better serve the clinical users.  The 
density of the serum was determined at 1.0274 g/mL with an expanded uncertainty of 0.0006 g/mL (coverage factor 
k = 2).  The latter must be considered when determinations are carried out on a gravimetric basis. 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS 
 
Sample  Collection  and  Preparation:    The  procedures  and  protocols  established  for  the  1985  collection  of  the 
previously issued SRM 1598 Bovine Serum were adhered to reference 3.  The blood was obtained directly from an 
incision of the carotid artery and was collected in clean polyethylene pails.  It was then immediately (before clotting) 
distributed  to  clean  polyethylene  bottles  for  further  preparation  in  the  USDA  clean  room  facility.    After  clotting, 
purified serum was obtained by centrifugation.  Individual animal serum samples had been obtained during the period 
of 02 July 2003 to 10 July 2003.  These samples were kept at 4 °C.  The serum was then pooled and 5 mL aliquots 
were dispensed into pre-cleaned polypropylene tubes, which were capped and frozen at –80 °C; the vials have been 
kept in frozen storage since 14 July 2003. 
 
proximately
Homogeneity Assessment:  The homogeneity of SRM 1598a was assessed by analyzing samples of approximately 
1 mL from six vials selected from the beginning and the end of the bottling period and six samples from one vial from 
the middle of the bottling sequence.  Selenium was determined as an indicator for homogeneity by isotope dilution 
gas  chromatography  −  mass  spectrometry  (ID  GC-MS).    There  was  no  statistically  significant  difference  in 
concentration values among the samples; the standard deviation of the twelve results was 0.9 % relative.  During the 
course  of  the  analytical  characterizations  sample  sizes  down  to  0.2 mL  were  used.    No  evidence  of  material 
inhomogeneity was found for these determinations.  The recommended minimum sample size is 0.2 mL.  
 
Analytical Approach:  NIST values for cadmium and nickel were obtained with ID ICP-MS, all other elements were 
determined with at least one method carried out at NIST: instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA), neutron 
activation  analysis  with  pre-concentration  of  selected  elements  on  Chelex 100  columns (PNAA),  and  inductively 
coupled  plasma  mass  spectrometry (ICP-MS).    The  measurements  were  complemented  by  collaborating  scientists 
from research and clinical laboratories using graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometry (GF-AAS), ID GC-MS, 
ICP-MS,  ICP  atomic  emission (ICP-AES),  INAA,  and  neutron  activation  analysis  with  radiochemical 
separations (RNAA). 
 
Certified Values:  Certified values are derived from the NIST analytical results and the results of the collaborators.  
The  “bound  on  bias”  consensus  method  was  used  for  combining  results  from  individual  laboratories [4].    The 
uncertainty  listed  with  each  value  is  an  expanded  uncertainty,  with  coverage  factor 2  (approximately  95 % 
confidence).  The reporting follows the ISO/JCGM Guides [5].  The measurands are the total concentration values for 
the elements in Table 1.  The certified values are metrologically traceable to the derived SI unit for mass concentration 
(expressed as micrograms per liter). 
 
For each element, there is a NIST result with an uncertainty that is complete in terms of coverage of recognized sources 
of  uncertainties.    Except  for  the  elements  measured  by  IDMS,  these  results  are  combined  with  results  from 
collaborating laboratories with similarly complete uncertainties, and in certain cases several results without complete 
uncertainties.  The uncertainties of the latter results were augmented for probable bias on the basis of the differences 
among the results obtained by different methods [4]. 
 
 

SRM 

 

SRM 1598a 

Page 2 of 5 

Elements 

Table 1.  Certified Concentrations for Elements 
 

Concentration 
(µg/L) 

Elements 

Concentration 
(µg/L) 

Cadmium (Cd)(a) 
Cobalt (Co)(c,d,g) 
Cesium (Cs)(c,d,g) 
Copper (Cu)(f,h,e,g) 
Iron (Fe)(c,f,d,e) 
Manganese (Mn)(f,g,i) 

 
 
 
 1580 
 1680 
 

0.048  ± 
1.24  ± 
0.64  ± 

0.004 
0.07 
0.10 

±  90 
±  60 

1.78  ± 

0.33 

Nickel (Ni)(a) 
Rubidium (Rb)(c,f,d) 
Antimony (Sb)(c,f,d,g) 
Selenium (Se)(c,f,b,d,g) 
Vanadium (V)(f,h,g,i) 
Zinc (Zn)(c,f,d,e,g) 

0.94 

1.00 

 
  274 
 
  134.4 
 
  880 

1.88 

0.18 

± 
±  19 
± 
± 
± 
±  24 

0.15 
5.8 
0.11 

 
(a) ID ICP-MS at NIST 
(b) ID GC-MS at collaborating laboratories 
(c) INAA at NIST 
(d) INAA at collaborating laboratories 
(e) ICP-AES at collaborating laboratories 
(f) ICP-MS at NIST 
(g) ICP-MS at collaborating laboratories 
(h) PNAA at NIST 
(i)  RNAA at collaborating laboratories 
 
 
Reference Values:  Reference values are based on results from one method carried out in several laboratories or from 
two or more analytical methods without NIST results.  The measurands are the references values listed in Table 2 as 
determined by methods indicated below.  Metrological traceability is to the derived SI unit for mass concentration 
(expressed as micrograms per liter or milligrams per liter).  The methods of combining the results by different methods 
from different laboratories were applied as above.  These results do not fulfill the criteria for certification since they 
lack  a  full  estimate  of  method  bias  or  results  from  NIST  methods  are  not  available.    The  reporting  follows  the 
ISO/JCGM Guides [5].  Aluminum is included as reference value because none of the techniques reported results on 
the control material SRM 1598 that agreed with the certified values.  Chromium is provided as reference value because 
two out of sixteen determinations carried out at NIST resulted in values >> 1 µg/L, probably due to contamination 
whose source could have been in the investigated vials.  Mercury showed poor agreement among techniques.   
 

Table 2.  Reference Values for Concentrations of Selected Elements  

Concentration 
(µg/L) 

2.3  ± 
0.33  ± 
0.32  ± 
5.5  ± 

0.6 
0.08 
0.19 
1.0 

Elements  

Calcium (Ca)(b,c) 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

Concentration  
(mg/L) 

96  ±  7 

 

Elements 

Aluminum (Al)(e,g) 
Chromium (Cr)(a,f,d,g) 
Mercury (Hg)(a,d) 
Molybdenum (Mo)(d) 

 
 
 
 

INAA at NIST 
INAA at collaborating laboratories 
ICP-AES at collaborating laboratories 
ICP-MS at collaborating laboratories 

 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e)  PNAA at NIST 
(f)  RNAA at NIST 
(g)  GFAAS at collaborating laboratories 

 

 

SRM 1598a 

Page 3 of 5 

a  collaborating 
Information  Values:    Information  values  are  based  on  results  from  one  method  performed  at  a  collaborating 
laboratory. 

formed  at 

 
 
Table 3.  Information Values for Elements 

 

Elements 

Concentration 
(µg/L) 

0.3 
0.033 

Arsenic (As)(a) 
Thallium (Tl)(b) 
 
 

 
 

Elements 

Potassium (K)(c) 
Sodium (Na)(c) 
Phosphorous (P)(c) 
Sulfur (S)(c) 

Concentration 
(mg/L) 

265 
3200 
140 
940 

 
(a) RNAA at collaborating laboratory 
(b) ICP-MS at collaborating laboratory 
(c) ICP-AES at collaborating laboratory 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION 
 
Density:    The  density  was  determined  at  NIST  with  a  pycnometer  in  test  portions  from  six  vials.    A  value  of 
1.0274 ± 0.0006 g/mL was determined.  This value was confirmed using an electronic digital density meter (PAAR 
Model DMA 35; measured value, 1.027 g/mL). 
 
 

REFERENCES 

 
eck  J.;  Vanballenberghe,  L.;  Cornelis, 
[1]  Veillon C; Lewis, S.A.; Patterson, K.Y.; Wolf, W.R.; Harnly J.M.; Versieck J.; Vanballenberghe, L.; Cornelis, 
| for  Major  E 
R.; Ohaver, T.C.; Characterization of a Bovine Serum Reference Material for Major Elements, Minor Elements, 
and Trace Elements; Anal. Chem. 57, pp. 2106−2109 (1985).  

[2]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment 
of  Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136;  U.S. Government 
Printing  Office:    Washington, DC  (2000);  available  at:  http://www.nist.gov/srm/publications.cfm  (accessed 
Jan 2017). 

[3]  Veillon, C.; Patterson K.Y.; Reamer, D.C.; Biological Reference Materials; Wolf, W.R., Ed.; Wiley Press: New 

[4] 

[5] 

York, pp. 167−177 (1985). 
Levenson, M.S.; Banks, D.L.; Eberhardt, K.R.; Gill, L.M.; Guthrie, W.F.; Liu, H.-k.; Vangel, M.G.; Yen, J.H.; 
Zhang, N.F.; An Approach to Combining Results from Multiple Methods Motivated by the ISO GUM; J. Res. 
Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., Vol. 105, pp. 571–579 (2000). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data - Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement; 
(GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections), Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (JCGM) (2008); available at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Jan 2017);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results; NIST Technical Note 1297, U.S. Government Printing Office:  Washington, DC (1994); available at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed Jan 2017). 

 
 
 
 
  
Certificate Revision History:  10 January 2017 (Change of expiration date; editorial changes); 25 August 2008 (Original certificate date). 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
This  can  be
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program:    telephone (301)  975-2200;  fax (301)  948-3730;  e-mail 
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

possession  is  current. 

SRM 1598a 

Page 4 of 5 

APPENDIX:  ANALYSTS 
 

Chemical Sciences Division, NIST:  S.J. Christopher; S.E. Long; E.A. Mackey; K.E. Murphy; R. Zeisler. 
 
Cooperating Laboratories and Analysts: 
•  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (Atlanta, GA); R.L. Jones; K.L. Caldwell; P.J. Walter; O.N. Piraner 
•  GSF National Research Center for Environment and Health (Neuherberg, Germany); P. Schramel 
•  GV-Instruments, ICP-Business Unit (Manchester, UK); F. Abou-Shakra 
•  Hahn-Meitner-Institut,  Department  of  Trace  Elements  in  Health  and  Nutrition  (Berlin,  Germany);  D. Alber; 

D. Behne 
Josef Stefan Institute (Ljubljana, Slovenia); U. Repinc; V. Stibilj 

• 
•  Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (Taejeon, Republic of Korea); Y.S. Chung; J.H. Moon 
•  Mayo Clinic Metals Laboratory (Rochester, MN); J.A. Butz; S. Eckdahl; D. Nixon 
•  New  York  State  Dept  of  Health,  Wadsworth  Center,  Trace  Element  Laboratory  (Albany,  NY);  P.J. Parsons; 

C. Geraghty; C.D. Palmer 

•  USDA Beltsville Agricultural Research Center, Human Nutrition Research Center (Beltsville, MD); C. Veillon; 

N.A. Bryden; D. Hill; K.Y. Patterson; J. Harnly; E. Greene 

 

SRM 1598a 

Page 5 of 5 

