ow’ 
Ne  g- 

Somes  or

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material 1776 

 

Naval Brass WK1 
(In Cooperation with the Institute of Non-Ferrous Metals, Gliwice, Poland) 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is in the form  of a disk approximately 39.5 mm in diameter and 20 mm thick 
intended primarily for use in optical emission and X-ray fluorescence spectrometric methods of analysis.  This material is 
one in a series of five monolithic naval brasses prepared to  cover a range of compositions for particular elements of 
interest.  The other naval brasses in this WK series are SRMs 1777, 1778, 1779, and 1780.  
 
These SRMs were produced as part of a joint project between the NIST SRM Program and the Institute of Non-Ferrous 
Metals (IMN) in Gliwice, Poland under the sponsorship of the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Joint Fund.  Actual preparation of 
these materials was performed at the IMN using specialized production facilities.  The melting and casting technology used 
for the preparation of these materials was provided by M. Lachowski of the IMN [1].   
 
The certified values for seven elements are listed in Table 1.  The analytical methods used for the characterization of this 
SRM are given in Table 2.  All values are reported as mass fractions [2]. 
 

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fractions  

 

Element (%) 

Aluminum 0.11 
Antimony 0.024 
Bismuth 0.014 
Iron 0.28 
Lead 0.17 
Silicon 0.30 
Tin 0.11 

 

 

±  0.01 
±  0.004 
±  0.001 
±  0.02 
±  0.01 
±  0.02 
±  0.01 

Certified Values and Uncertainties:   The certified values are the means of the results from one or more analytical 
methods.  The uncertainty listed for each certified value is expressed as the “combined uncertainty” calculated according 
to the ISO Guide [3].  Each value listed is the 95 % confidence limit of the “true value”, and is intended to represent the 
combined effect of uncertainty components associated with various analytical factors such as method imprecision, 
possible systematic errors among methods, and material variability. 

Expiration of Certification:  The certification of this SRM is valid, w ithin the measurement uncertainties specified, 
until 31 December 2004 .  Even though this material will likely remain stable for many years, the period of NIST 
certification has been abbreviated because the criteria used 
certification requirements [4].  This certification is nullif
modified. 

in the original certification, do not meet current NIST 
ied if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise 

 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  17 September 2003 
See Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

 
SRM 1776 

Willie E. May, Chief 
Analytical Chemistry Division 

John Rumble, Jr., Chief 
  Measurement Services Division  

Page 1 of 3 

 

 

 

The overall coordination of technical measurement and interlaboratory analyses were provided by W. Stankiewicz of the 
IMN and W.P. Reed of the NIST Office of Measurement Services. 
 
Homogeneity testing was performed by E. Műller and S. Witkowska of the IMN, Gliwice, Poland and by P.A. Pella and 
M.L. Salit of the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division. 
 
Statistical analysis was provided by L.M. Gill and L. Alvarez-Rojas of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
The technical and support aspects involved in the preparation, certification, and issuance of this SRM were coordinated 
through the NIST Standard Reference Materials Program by P.A. Lundberg.  Support aspects involved in the issuance of 
the revised certificate were coordinated through the NIST Standard Reference Materials Program by B.S. MacDonald of 
the NIST Measurement Services Division.   
 
Alloy Preparation:  Each brass alloy was sequentially cast as four billets of material.  Homogeneity testing was done 
prior to further processing.  The billets were then heated in a resistance furnace to approximately 800 °C, followed by an 
extrusion press to the final 39.5 mm diameter.  Homogeneity testing was done on each end of every rod and preliminary 
analysis was done by X-ray fluorescence spectrometry, op
spectrometry.  The final samples were then cut from selected samples representing the entire lot, milled into chips, and a 
composite produced.  The certification was done using samples of the composite. 

tical emission spectrometry, and atomic absorption 

 
Table 2.  Methods Used for the Analysis of SRM 1776 

 

Elements Methods
 
Aluminum FAAS, 
Antimony FAAS, 
Bismuth FAAS, 
Iron FAAS, 
Lead FAAS, 
Silicon GRAV, 
Tin FAAS 

 

a 

 

SPECTRO 
FAAS-Fe 
FAAS-Fe 
FAAS-La 
FAAS-Fe 
SPECTRO 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
aMethods 
 
Flame atomic absorption spectrometry 
FAAS 
FAAS after co-precipitation with Fe(OH)3 
FAAS-Fe 
FAAS-La   FAAS after co-precipitation with La(OH)3 
GRAV Gravimetry 
SPECTRO Spectrophotometry 
 
Cooperative Analysts and Laboratories 
 
W. Stankiewicz and Ł. Buzek; IMN; Gliwice, Poland 
S. Honc and B. Sendal; ZHPPMN Hutmen; Wroclaw, Poland 
A. Stroba, K. Zimma, and W.M. Łabedy; IMN; Gliwice, Poland 
J. Palion and D. Derdas; HMN Szopienice; Katowice, Poland 

 
SRM 1776 

Page 2 of 3 

 

REFERENCES 

 
[1] M űller, E.; Stankiewicz, W.; Lachowski, M.; Preparation of the Material for Spectral Reference Materials for the 

ski,  M.; 

Naval Brasses (MC62 and MC63) - 4th part (1992). 

[2] Taylor, B.N.;  Guide for the Use of the International System of Units (SI); NIST Special Publication 811 (1995). 
[3]  Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement, ISBN 92-67-10188-9, 1st Ed., ISO, Geneva, Switzerland 

(1993); see also Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST 
Measurement Results; NIST Technical Note 1297, U.S. Government  Printing Office:  Washington, DC (1994); 
available at http://physics.nist.gov/Pubs/. 

[4]  May, W.; Parris, R.; Beck, C.; Fassett, J.; Greenberg, R.; Guenther, F.; Kramer, G.; Wise, S.; Gills, T.; Colbert, J.; 

Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.;  Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of Reference 
Materials for Chemical Measurements ;  NIST Special Publication 260-136, U.S. Government Printing Office: 
Washington, DC (2000).  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Certificate Revision History:  17 September 2003 (Removal and de-certification of Cu, Mn, Ni and P certified values.  Addition of expiration date); 
   
14 July 1995 (Original certificate date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users of this SRM should ensure that the certificate in 
contacting the SRM Program at:  telephone (301) 975-6776; fax (301) 926-4751; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the 
Internet http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

their possession is current. This can be accomplished by 

 
SRM 1776 

Page 3 of 3 

