fon El) 

- Nationd  Inetitite  of  Staruxde  &  Technology 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SPIT  is  in  chip  form  for  use  in  chemical  analysis. 
form  as  SRM  1133  primarily  for  application  i  optical  emission  and  2-ray  spectrometric  methods  of  analysis. 

It  also  is  available  in  solid 

Gertificate  of  Analysts 

Standard  Reference  Material  179 

High-Silicon  Steel 

(In  Cooperation  with  the  American  Society  for  Testing  and  Materials) 

Ele  ment 

Carhor 
Manganese 
Phosphorus 
mlalPar 
mdlicon 
Copper 
Nickel 
Chromium 
Vanadium 
Mobybderam 
Adatrarnam 
Tin 

Percent  by  wt. 

0.027 
0.094 
0.006 
0.026 
3.19 
0.056 
0.020 
0.022 
=01 
0.014 
0.0028 
0.004 

CERTIFICATION:  The  value  lsted  for  an  element  is  the  Sesf  esfimefe  of  the  "true"  value  based  on  the 
cooperative  results. 
in  the  last 
significant  figure  reported. 

The  value  is  not  expected  to  deviate  from  the  "true!  value  by  more  than  + 

1 

The  analytical  program  included  the  chenucal  anabrses  for  certification  of  the  solid-form  material,  SRM  1135,  and 
the  chemical  analyses  for  intercomparisons  of  the  results  obtained  on  SRM  1135  with  those  obtained  on  this  chip- 
form  material  SRI  179. 
Wo  anabytically  significant  differences  were  observed  between  the  tro  forms  of 
material. 

PLANNING,  PREPARATION,  TESTING,  ANALYSIS: 
is  desirable  to  have  the 
material  inturo  forms:  chips,  primarily  for  chemical  analysis,  and  solids,  primarily  for  optical  emission  and  A-ray 
spectrometric  methods  of  analysis.  Before  SRM  1135  (solid  form)  was  prepared,  plans  were  made  to  provide  the 
same  material  in  chip  form  as  SRM  179. 

For  marsr  metal  SRIMs  it 

The  material  for  this  standard  was  prepared by  the  Armco  Steel  Corporation.  A  single  ingot  was  pressed  ta  a  slab 
with  one  dimension  of  the  cross  section  four  times  that  of  the  other  dimension.  After  cropping  top  and  bottom, 
the  slab  was  cut  lengthvrise  andthe  center  section,  corresponding  to  about  one-fourth  of  the  original  ingot,  was 
discarded.  About  half  of  the  slab  material  was  rolled  into  rounds  127  mum  (3  in)  in  diameter  to  be  chipped  at  MIST 
for  SRM  179.  The  remairune  material  was  hot  rolled  to  oversized  rods,  annealed,  and  centerless  ground  to  final 
rod  size  for  SRV]  1133. 

Gaithersburg,  MID  20899 
May  3,  1994 
(Revision  of  certificate  dated  7-15-76) 

Thomas  E.  Gills,  Chief 
ntandard  Reference  Materials  Program 

Cover)

Extensrre  homogeneity  testing  was  performed  at  NIST  and  inchiled  metallographic  studies  ty  CH.  Brack,  optical 
emission  spectrometric  analysis  by  DM.  Bouchette  and  J.L.  Weber,  Jr,  X-ray  spectrometric  analysis  by  3.D. 
Rasberry  and  J.  Mckay,  and  chemical  analysis  by  J.R.  Baldwin  and  3.A.  Wicks.  The  testing  revealed  the  entire  lot 
of  material  to  be  of  high  homogeneity. 

The  overall  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  the  certification  of  SRT  179  was  performed 
jointly  ty  JI.  Shultz,  Research  Associate,  ASTMVWIST  Research  Associate  Program,  and  RE.  Michaelis. 
Revision  of  this  SRM  was  coordinated  through  the  Standard  Reference  Materials  Program by  PA.  Lundberg. 

Chetucal  analyses  for  certification  of  the  solid-form  material,  SRM  1135,  were  performed  in  the  anakptical 
laboratories  of Armco  Steel  Corp.,  Research  and  Technology,  Middletown,  OH,  MM.  Dannis  and  RL.  LeRoy,  U5. 
steel  Corp.,  Applied  Research  Lab,  Monroeville,  PA,  WR.  Bandi  and  JL.  Lutz,  Gary  Steel  V/orks,  Gary,  IN,  EH. 
shipley,  and  Geneva  Works,  Geneva,  UT,  GE.  Stewart,  and  the  MIST  Analytical  Chemistry  Darrision,  J.R.  Baldirin, 
R.E.  Bell  E.R.  Deardorff,  E.J.  Maienthal  T.C.  Rains,  TA.  Rush,  and  34.  Wicks. 

Chetucal  analyses  for  intercomparisons  of  SRMMs  1135  and  179,  leading  to  the  certification  of  this  chip  form 
material  SRM  179,  were  performed  in  the 
of  Armco  Steel  Corp,  Research  and 
Technology,  Ml.  Dans  and  RL.  LeRoy.

analytical  laboratories 

