National Institute of Standards and Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material 1828b 

 

f  Constituents:  The  certified 

 
:  Levels) 
Ethanol-Water Solutions (Six Levels) 
 
 
This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  a  set  of  six  levels  of  ethanol  (ethyl  alcohol:  Chemical  Abstracts 
Service [CAS]  Registry  Number  64-17-5).    SRM 1828b  is  intended  for  use  in  the  calibration  of  instruments  and 
techniques used for the determination of ethanol in solutions.  A unit of SRM 1828b consists of six 2 mL ampoules, 
one  ampoule  each  of  the  nominal  ethanol  mass  fractions  of  0.02 %,  0.04 %,  0.08 %,  0.1 %,  0.2 %,  and  0.3 %, 
labeled SRMs 2891 through 2896, respectively.  Each ampoule contains approximately 1.2 mL of solution.   
 
ncertainties  for  each
Certified Mass Fractions of Constituents:  The certified mass fraction values and estimated uncertainties for each 
of the six solutions are  given in Table 1.  The certified  values are based on results obtained from the  gravimetric 
preparation  of  each  solution  and  from  the  analytical  results  determined  using  gas  chromatography (GC)  and 
titrimetry.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy in that all 
known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or accounted for by NIST [1]. 
 
Expiration  of  Certification:    The  certification  of  SRM 1828b  is  valid,  within  the  measurement  uncertainty 
specified, until 30 April 2023, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with the instructions given in 
this  certificate  (see  “Instructions  for  Handling,  Storage,  and  Use”).    The  certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is 
damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified 
 
Maintenance  of  SRM  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If 
substantive  technical changes occur that affect the certification before the expiration of this certificate, NIST  will 
notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
The coordination of the technical measurements leading to the certification of this SRM was under the direction of 
M.M. Schantz and S.A. Wise of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Consultation  on  the  statistical  design  of  the  experimental  work  and  evaluation  of  the  data  were  provided  by 
S.D. Leigh of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Partial funding support for the preparation and certification of this Standard Reference Material was provided by the 
National Institute of Justice (NIJ) and managed through the NIST Office of Law Enforcement Standards (OLES). 
 
Preparation of and analytical measurements on the SRM were performed by J.V. Goodpaster and M.M. Schantz of 
the NIST Chemical Sciences Division and M.P. Cronise and C.N. Fales of the NIST Office of Reference Materials.  
Additional analytical measurements were performed by M. Archer of the National Metrology Laboratory, Pretoria, 
South Africa and L.G. Mackay and D.G. Burke of the National Analytical Reference Laboratory, Sydney, Australia. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  11 April 2013 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

Page 1 of 3 

  

SRM 1828b 

at  temperatures  between  10

INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE AND USE 
 
Handling:  The solutions contain ethanol in water at the stated concentrations.  Use proper disposal methods. 
 
Storage:  Sealed ampoules, as received, should be stored in the dark at temperatures between 10 °C and 30 °C. 
 
Use:    Sample  aliquots  for  analysis  should  be  withdrawn  immediately  after  opening  the  ampoules  and  should  be 
processed without delay for the certified values in Table 1 to be valid within the stated uncertainty.  Because of the 
volatility of ethanol, the certified values are NOT applicable to material stored in ampoules that have been opened 
for more than 2 min, even if they are resealed. 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
The  solutions  were  prepared  at  NIST  by  weighing  and  mixing  known  masses  of  ethanol  and  organic-free  water.  
Each solution was mixed a minimum of 16 h.  The total mass of each solution was measured, and the concentration 
of each solution was calculated from this gravimetric procedure.  These gravimetric concentrations were adjusted for 
the  purity  estimation  of  the  ethanol,  which  was  determined  using  gas  chromatography  with  flame  ionization 
detection  (GC-FID)  with  two  stationary  phases  of  different  polarities,  differential  scanning  calorimetry,  and  Karl 
Fischer analysis for water content.  The bulk solution was chilled slightly, and 1.2 mL aliquots were dispensed into 
2 mL amber glass ampoules, which were then flame sealed.  
 
Aliquots  from  nine  ampoules,  selected  using  a  random  stratified  sampling  scheme,  were  analyzed  in  duplicate  by 
using  GC-FID  on  a  relatively  polar  DB-wax  column,  15 m × 0.45 mm id,  0.85 µm  film  thickness  (Agilent 
Technologies,  Wilmington,  DE).    The  internal  standard  added  to  each  sample  for  quantification  purposes  was 
1-propanol.  Calibration solutions consisting of weighed amounts of ethanol and the internal standard compound in 
organic-free water were chromatographically analyzed to determine analyte response factors. 
 
In  addition,  the  concentration  of  each  of  the  six  solutions  was  determined  at  the  National  Metrology  Laboratory 
(Pretoria, South Africa) using titrimetry.  The ethanol in known masses of the solutions was oxidized to acetic acid 
using  a  known  mass  of  standard  potassium  dichromate  solution  in  the  presence  of  sulfuric  acid.    The  quantity  of 
ethanol  in  the  solution  was  determined  from  the  quantity  of  unreacted  potassium  dichromate  in  the  solution.    To 
determine the quantity of unreacted potassium dichromate, potassium iodide was added to the oxidized mixture, and 
the liberated iodine was titrated with a sodium thiosulfate solution.  A minimum of seven titrations were done for 
each solution. 
 
The concentrations of three of the solutions (nominal  mass concentrations of 0.08 %, 0.1 %, and 0.2 %) were also 
determined  at  the  National  Analytical  Reference  Laboratory  (Sydney,  Australia)  using  an  exact  matching  isotope 
dilution-gas chromatographic/mass spectrometric (ID-GC/MS) method.  The ID-GC/MS method utilized carbon-13 
labeled  ethanol  and  GC/MS  analysis  with  a  Chrompack  porous  layer  PoraPlot  Q  column,  27.5 m × 0.32 mm id 
(Varian, Mulgrave, Victoria, Australia).  Duplicate samples from six ampoules were analyzed using the ID-GC/MS 
method. 
 
 

 

                                                           

(1) Certain commercial equipment, instrumentation, or materials are identified in this certificate to adequately specify the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by NIST, nor does it imply that the 
materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
SRM 1828b 

Page 2 of 3 

Certified Values:  The results are expressed as the certified value ± the expanded uncertainty.  Certified values are 
unweighted  means  of  concentrations  determined  by  gravimetric  preparation  and  chromatographic  and  titrimetric 
measurements [2].  The uncertainty listed with each value is an expanded uncertainty about the mean, with coverage 
factor 2  (approximately  95 %  confidence),  calculated  by  combining  a  between-source  variance  incorporating 
between-method bias with a pooled within-source variance following the ISO Guide [3].  The uncertainty includes 
both  correction  for  estimated  purity  and  allowance  for  differences  among  the  concentrations  determined  by 
gravimetric preparation and chromatographic and titrimetric measurements. 
 

Table 1. Certified Values of Ethanol(a) in Water for the Six Levels Comprising SRM 1828b 

1  Values  of  Ethanol 

 

 
 
 

Nominal Mass Fraction Level 
(%) 

Mass Fraction 
(%) 

0.02 
0.04 
0.08 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 

 
 
 
 
 
 

0.01951  ±  0.00018 
0.03900  ±  0.00046 
0.08023  ±  0.00074 
0.10084  ±  0.00083 
0.1701  ±  0.0014 
0.2980  ±  0.0030 

REFERENCES 

[2] 

Office: 

Printing 

Government 

 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.;  Gettings, R.;  MacDonald, B.;  Definitions  of  Terms  and  Modes  Used  at  NIST 
for 
Value-Assignment  of  Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136; 
U.S. 
at 
http://www.nist.gov/srm/publications.cfm (accessed Apr 2013) 
Levenson, M.S.;  Banks, D.L.;  Eberhardt, K.R.;  Gill, L.M.;  Guthrie, W.F.;  Liu, H.K.;  Vangel, M.G.; 
Yen, J.H.;  Zhang, N.F.;  An  Approach  to  Combining  Results  from  Multiple  Methods  Motivated  by  the  ISO 
GUM; J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., Vol. 105, pp. 571–579 (2000). 
JCGM 100:2008;  Evaluation  of  Measurement  Data  —  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in 
Measurement  (GUM  1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology  (2008); 
available 
(accessed 
Apr 2013); see also Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of 
NIST Measurement Results; NIST Technical Note 1297; U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC 
(1994); available at http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/tn1297/index.cfm (accessed Apr 2013). 

http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf 

Washington, DC 

available 

(2000); 

[3] 

at 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certificate Revision History:  11 April 2013 (Extended certification period; editorial changes); 24 March 2004 (Original certificate date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting 
(301)  948-3730; 
 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301)  975-2200; 

telephone 

fax 

SRM 1828b 

Page 3 of 3 

