National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 1899 

 

 
Silicon Nitride Powder-Specific Surface Area Standard 
 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended for use in the calibration of instruments used to measure specific 
surface area (SSA) in the range of 0.1 m2/g to 1 000 m2/g.  A unit of SRM 1899 consists of a single bottle containing 
approximately 4 g of silicon nitride powder.  The SSA of this material was measured using a static volumetric type 
Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) (nitrogen gas)  instrument using a pellet cell. 
 

Table 1.  Certified SSA Values and Uncertainties (2σ) by Nitrogen BET 
 

Measurement Technique 

Specific Surface Area 

Multipoint 

Single Point 

10.67 m2/g  ±  0.19 m2/g 

10.52 m2/g  ±  0.62 m2/g 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
Expiration of Certification: The certification of this SRM is deemed to be indefinite within the stated uncertainties, 
provided the SRM is stored and handled in accordance with the Storage and Handling and Instructions for Use sections 
of  this  certificate.    Accordingly, periodic  recalibration  or  recertification  of  this  SRM  is  not  required.    However, 
certification will be nullified if the SRM is contaminated or otherwise altered. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
NOTICE AND WARNINGS TO USERS 
 
Storage and Handling:  Silicon nitride is typically inert under ambient and testing conditions.  Samples from the 
original bottle may be returned to the bottle and reused provided that the Instructions for Use, Sampling Procedure, and 
Outgassing Procedure are strictly followed. 
 
Cautions to User:  This SRM is NOT certified for pore size distribution, sample density, adsorption/desorption isotherm 
form, or  particle size by any other method.  While the SSA of this SRM was determined using a static volumetric BET 
type of instrument using nitrogen gas, it is possible that different methods of gas adsorption surface area analysis (e.g. 
flowing gas analysis/dynamic gas analysis) may be used.  Its suitability for use with a different gas is undetermined.  The 
user must determine the effect of different methods and measurement dynamics on the SSA of this SRM.   
 
Coordination for this SRM was  provided by S.E. Malghan and S.J. Dapkunas of the NIST Ceramics Division.  
 
The BET measurement technique, development, and certification was performed by D.B. Minor of the NIST Ceramics 
Division. 
 
Statistical analysis was performed by S.D. Leigh of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  22 December 2008 
See Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

 
Debra L. Kaiser, Chief 
Ceramics Division 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

SRM 1899  

 

Page 1 of 3 

Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Measurement  Services 
Division. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE1 
 
The following instructions are based upon using a Quantachrome Autosorb 1, Model AS-1-11 using the pellet cell.  Use 
of a large internal diameter cell will most likely yield an SSA, both single point and multipoint, higher than the stated 
value  for  this  SRM.    The  effect  of  using  a  larger  volume  cell  has  not  been  determined  by  NIST.    An  instrument 
manufacturer (Quantachrome Corp.) has tested SRM 1899 using both a large diameter sample tube and the pellet tube.  
The results of these investigations are given in Table 2.  If using equipment other than that listed above, consult the 
equipment manufacturer’s operating instructions for variations in testing procedure.  The sampling and outgassing 
procedures described below should always be followed.  The sample preparation procedure was developed at NIST for 
the U.S. Department of Energy and the International Energy Agency [2]. 
 
Sampling Procedure:  Pour the entire contents of the bottle onto a suitable piece of weighing paper and quarter the 
resulting pile.  Scoop enough material from each of the quarters so that the entire amount is sufficient for analysis.  The 
mass to be analyzed should be between 0.1 g and 0.25 g.  Return the rest of the sample to the bottle, recap, and reserve 
for future use.  The bulk sample need not be kept under vacuum or in a desiccator. 
 
Outgassing Procedure:  Pre-weigh an empty sample tube and filler rod and record this empty mass to the closest 
0.0001 g.  Place the sample into the analysis tube per manufacturer’s instructions or accepted practice.  Evacuate the 
sample tube to less than 1.3 Pa (10 mTorr) and heat the sample to 200 oC for two h.  At the end of this time, turn off the 
heat, remove the heating mantle and allow the sample to come to ambient temperature.  Back fill that sample with He 
gas, and weigh  to the closest 0.0001 g.  This is the filled mass.  Calculate the sample mass by difference.  Immediately 
perform the analysis following the manufacturer’s directions or the user’s particular method. 
 
Certification Technique and Uncertainties:  The SSA of SRM 1899 was determined on 20 randomly selected bottles 
from the production run.  This SRM is certified for both multipoint (MP) and single point (SP) analysis using nitrogen 
gas as the adsorbate and using a static volumetric type of instrument based upon the BET method [3].  The certified 
specific surface area values and the expanded uncertainties assigned, computed according to the ISO and NIST Guides 
[4],  are  listed  in  Table  1.    The  expanded  uncertainty  at  the  95  %  level  of  confidence  includes  uncertainty  due  to 
measurement imprecision as well as material variation.  The certified value and expanded uncertainty define a range of 
values within which the true specific surface area is expected to lie with at least 95 % confidence.  
 
RM 8570 LGC GM Calcined Kaolin (surface area) was used as a reference in the evaluation of SRM 1899.  The  single 
point and multipoint values reported for SSA of RM 8570 are close to those determined for SRM 1899, thus RM 8570 
and SRM 1899 can be directly related [5].  Two main advantages of using SRM 1899 over RM 8570 are that the sample 
preparation method for SRM 1899 is easier, and bound water of hydration is not an issue. 
 
Additional Noncertified Information: Measurement using large diameter cells is compared with pellet cells in Table 2. 
A typical analysis of the nitrogen gas used during the certification of SRM 1899 is given in Table 3.   
 
Table 2.  Manufacturer’s Information Values and Uncertainties (2σ) Comparison of SSA using Differing Cell Types 
 

Measurement Technique 

Cell Type 

Pellet 

Pellet 

Large Diameter 

Large Diameter 

 

Specific Surface Area 

 
10.77  m2/g  ±  0.15 m2/g 
 
10.55  m2/g  ±  0.14 m2/g 
 
11.13  m2/g  ±  1.20 m2/g 
 
10.85  m2/g  ±  0.87 m2/g 

 

 
Multipoint 
 
Single Point 
 
Multipoint 
 
Single Point 

 
                                                 

 

 

SRM 1899  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

1Certain commercial equipment, instruments or materials are identified in this report to adequately specify the experimental procedure.  
Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor does it 
imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 

Page 2 of 3 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table 3.  Typical Gas Analysis 

Gas 
Grade 
Assay 
O2 
H2O 
Total Hydrocarbons 

Nitrogen 
Industrial 

99.995 % 
< 20 mg/kg 
< 16 mg/kg 
< 5 mg/kg 

p. 309 (1938). 

Standards and Technology, U.S. Department of Commerce: Gaithersburg, MD (1994). 

REFERENCES 
[1]  Malghan,  S.G.;  Hausner,  H.;  Pompe,  R.;  Tsubaki,  J.;  Hsu,  S.M.;  Development  and  Testing  of  Procedures  for 
Characterization of Ceramic Powders, IEA ANNEX II, Subtask 6, prepared by NIST for the U.S. Department of 
 
 
Energy, Oak Ridge National Laboratory (1993). 
[2]  Brunauer, S.; Emmett, P.; Teller, E.; Adsorption of Gases in Multimolecular Layers; J. Amer. Chem. Soc., Vol. 60, 
 
[3]  ISO;  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in  Measurement,  ISBN  92-67-10188-9,  1st  ed.;  International 
Organization for Standardization:  Geneva, Switzerland (1993); see also Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for 
 
Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement  Results,  NIST  Technical  Note  1297,  U.S. 
 
Government Printing Office, Washington, DC (1994); available at http://physics.nist.gov/Pubs/. 
 
[4]  Colbert,  J.C.;  Report  of  Investigation  of  Surface  Area  Reference  Material  8570  Kaolin,  National  Institute  of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certificate Revision History:  22 December 2008 (Editorial updates); 12 July 1997 (Original certificate date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  certificate  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be  accomplished  by 
contacting the SRM Program at:  telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 926-4751; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the 
Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

SRM 1899  

 

Page 3 of 3 

