Nattonal  dnstilute  of  Standards  &  Cerhnology 

Cerhtfirate 

Standard  Reference  Material  1906 

Nickel  Microhardness  Test  Block 

(Knoop) 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  calibrating  Knoop-type  microhardness  testers  and 
is  certified  for  an  average  Knoop  hardness  value  at  4.905  N  (500  g-f).  SRM  1906  consists  of  a  1.35-cm  square  test  block 
of  electrodeposited  bright  nickel  (approximately  750  um  thick)  on  an  AISI  1010  steel  substrate.  The  block  is  mounted  in 
thermosetting  epoxy. 

Test  Block  No.: 

Calibrated  by: 

Lot  No.: 

*Date: 

Positions  of  Indentations 

  

] 

2 

5 

  
    

4 

3 

Load-500  g-f 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4, 
5. 
Average 

. 

_  *The  date  is  used  for  recordation  purposes  only.  There  is  no  need  for  periodic  recertification.  The  certified  hardness 

values  are  stable  with  proper  care  and  handling  of  the  test  block. 

The  average  values  are  certified  to  be  within  +  5%  of  the  true  value. 

The  Knoop  hardness  measurement  was  made  according  to  ASTM  Test  Methods  E  384  and  B  578. 

Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 
November  2,  1994 
(Revision  of  certificate  dated  3-20-92) 

(over)

Thomas  E.  Gills,  Chief 
Standard  Reference  Materials  Program 

  

Hardness  values  for  this  SRM  were  obtained  using  a  calibrated  hardness  tester. 
The  optical  measuring  device  of  the 
hardness  tester  was  calibrated  with  a  certified  stage  micrometer  while  the  loading  mechanism  was  calibrated  with  a 
miniature  precision  load  cell  that  had  been  previously  calibrated  with  NIST  certified  weights. 
The  indentations  are 
measured  at  a  total  magnification  of  600  using  a  60X  dry  lens  objective  with  a  numerical  aperature  of  0.80. 

The  microhardness  test  block  was  fabricated  and  calibrated  in  the  NIST  Materials  Science  and  Engineering  Laboratory, 
Metallurgy  Division's  Electrochemical  Processing  Group,  by  D.R.  Kelley,  C.E.  Johnson,  and  $.W.  Claggett. 

The  overall  direction  of  the  technical  effort  leading  to  certification  of  this  Standard  Reference  Material  was  performed  under 
the  direction  of  G.R.  Stafford,  Metallurgy  Division: 
E.  Escalante,  Electrochemical  Processing  Group. 

technical  coordination  was  performed  by  E.C.  Soltani  and 

The  support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  Standard  Reference  Materials 
Program  by  N.M.  Trahey.

