National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material® 1951c 
 
Lipids in Frozen Human Serum 

tely 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  evaluating  the  accuracy  of  clinical 
procedures  for  the  determination  of  total  cholesterol,  high-density  lipoprotein (HDL)-cholesterol,  low-density 
lipoprotein (LDL)-cholesterol, and total glycerides in human serum.  It is also intended for use in validating working 
or secondary reference materials.  A unit of SRM 1951c consists of four vials of frozen human serum, two vials each 
at two different analyte concentration levels.  Each bottle contains approximately 1 mL of serum. 
 
Certified Concentration Values:  The certified concentration values  for  total cholesterol and total glycerides (as 
triolein) are provided in Table 1a (mmol/L) and Table 1b (mg/dL).  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST 
has the highest confidence in its accuracy in that all known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or 
taken into account [1].  The certified values for these analytes were determined at NIST and at the Lipid Reference 
Laboratory at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) by isotope dilution gas chromatography–mass 
spectrometry (ID-GC-MS) [2–5].  The methods used by NIST and CDC for measurement of total cholesterol and by 
NIST for measurement of total glycerides are recognized as higher-order reference measurement procedures by the 
Joint Committee for Traceability in Laboratory Medicine (JCTLM) [6].  The certified concentrations apply only to 
serum thawed to room temperature, 20 °C to 25 °C (see “Instructions for Storage and Use”). 
 
Reference Values:  The reference values for HDL-cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, and total cholesterol, provided by 
the Lipid Reference Laboratory at CDC, are provided in Table 2.  Reference values are noncertified values that are 
the best estimate of the true values based on available data; however, the values do not meet the NIST criteria for 
certification  and  are  provided  with  associated  uncertainties  that  may  reflect  only  measurement  precision,  may  not 
include all sources of uncertainty, or may reflect a lack of sufficient statistical agreement among multiple analytical 
methods [1].  These results were obtained using CDC reference methods for lipids [7,8]. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 1951c is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until 30 April 2023, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with instructions given in this certificate 
(see  “Instructions  for  Storage  and  Use”).    The  certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is  damaged,  contaminated,  or 
ie  SRM  is  damaged,  contaminated,  or 
otherwise modified.  
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Overall  direction  and  coordination  of  the  analytical  measurements  leading  to  the  certification  of  this  SRM  were 
performed by K.W. Phinney of the NIST Biomolecular Measurement Division and L.C. Sander of the NIST Chemical 
Sciences Division.  Overall coordination of the measurements at CDC was performed by H. Vesper. 
 
trams  Office. 
Acquisition of the material was performed by K.W. Phinney and K.E. Sharpless of the NIST Special Programs Office.  
Analytical measurements at NIST were performed by L.T. Sniegoski of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division and 
M.J. Welch,  formerly  of  NIST.    Analytical  measurements  at  CDC  were  performed  by  S. Edwards,  S. Pyatt,  and 
S. Stribling of the CDC Division of Laboratory Sciences. 
 
Statistical analysis was provided by N.-F. Zhang of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
18
Certificate Issue Date:  05 January 2018 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

 

Page 1 of 4 

  

SRM 1951c 

 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
WARNINGS TO USERS 
 
Warning:    SRM 1951c  IS  INTENDED  FOR  RESEARCH  USE.    THIS  IS  A  HUMAN-SOURCE  MATERIAL.  
HANDLE  PRODUCT  AS  A  BIOHAZARDOUS  MATERIAL  CAPABLE  OF  TRANSMITTING  INFECTIOUS 
DISEASE.  The supplier of the serum has reported that each donor unit of serum used in the preparation of this product 
has been tested by an FDA-approved method and found non-reactive/negative for hepatitis B surface antigen (HbsAg), 
human immunodeficiency (HIV) 1 and 2 antibodies, and hepatitis C virus (HCV).  However, no known test method 
can offer complete assurance that hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, HIV, or other infectious agents are absent from 
this material.  Accordingly, this human blood-based product should be handled at the Biosafety Level 2 or higher as 
recommended for any POTENTIALLY INFECTIOUS HUMAN SERUM OR BLOOD SPECIMEN in the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention/National Institutes of Health Manual [9]. 
 
STORAGE  AND  USE 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage:  The serum is shipped frozen (on dry ice), and upon receipt, should be stored frozen until ready for use.  A 
freezer temperature of –20 °C is acceptable for storage up to one week.  If a longer storage time is anticipated, the 
material should be stored at or below –60 °C.  The SRM should not be exposed to sunlight or ultraviolet radiation.  
Storage of thawed material at room or refrigerator temperatures may result in changes in the analyte concentrations. 
 
zer  and  allowed  to  stand  at  room  temperature 
Use:  Bottles of the SRM to be analyzed should be removed from the freezer and allowed to stand at room temperature 
until thawed.  After the material is thawed to room temperature, it should be used immediately.  The material should 
be swirled gently to mix it before aliquots are withdrawn. 
 
SOURCE, PREPARATION, AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
Source of Material:  SRM 1951c was prepared by Solomon Park Research Laboratories (Kirkland, WA) following 
a protocol developed by the Cholesterol Reference Materials Subcommittee of the National Committee for Clinical 
Laboratory Standards (NCCLS) [10].  The goal of the NCCLS project was to develop a commutable lipid reference 
material for total cholesterol that would be useful in most presently available field methods.  A large-scale study of a 
prior lot of this material involving most of the major clinical measurement systems found no significant biases between 
results on that prior lot and those from fresh, unpooled serum.  The study verified that material prepared following the 
recommendations of the NCCLS study is an appropriate mechanism for transferring accuracy from the definitive and 
reference methods to the clinical laboratories without significant matrix effects on the systems tested.  
 
Preparation of Material:  Donor units were collected and allowed to clot at room temperature for 4 h.  The serum 
was  removed  from  the  clot  and  immediately  cooled  to  approximately  4 °C.    Each  unit  of  donor  serum  was  then 
analyzed for total cholesterol content to determine which donor units to pool.  The donor units selected were then 
pooled.  One-milliliter aliquots of the bulk pool were dispensed into 3 mL glass vials and frozen at –70 °C.  This was 
accomplished within 50 h of the initial donor unit collection. 
 
Analysis:  Value assignment of the concentrations of total cholesterol and total glycerides (as triolein) was based on 
the combination of results from ID-GC-MS methods at NIST and CDC.  In addition, CDC provided results for total 
cholesterol using the Abell−Kendall reference method [7].  Concentrations of HDL-cholesterol were determined at 
CDC  using  the  ultracentrifugation  reference  method  [8],  and  LDL-cholesterol  was  determined  at  CDC  using  the 
beta-quantification reference method [8].   
 
Homogeneity  Analysis:    The  homogeneity  assessment  was  made  at  the  time  the  certification  analyses  were 
performed.   A stratified sampling plan  was devised to test  for homogeneity across the lot of vials.  There  was no 
apparent trend in the data when plotted against the sequence in which the vials were prepared. 
 
 

,  AND  ANALYSIS

immediately 

 

                                                           

(1) Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments,  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental procedure. Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
SRM 1951c 

Page 2 of 4 

Certified  Values:    Values  for  total  cholesterol  and  total  glycerides  are  based  upon  the  means  of  the  results  from 
analyses at NIST and CDC using ID-GC-MS.  The uncertainty provided  with each certified  value is an expanded 
uncertainty  about  the  mean  to  cover  the  measurand  with  approximately  95 %  confidence;  it  incorporates  Type B 
uncertainty components related to the analyses and expresses both the observed difference between the results from 
the  methods  and  their  respective  uncertainties,  consistent  with  the  ISO/JCGM  Guides [11,12].    The  expanded 
uncertainty is calculated as U = kuc, where uc is the combined uncertainty and k is a coverage factor corresponding to 
approximately 95 % confidence for each analyte [11].  For the certified values shown in Table 1, k = 2.  The measurand 
is  concentration  value  for  each  analyte  listed  in  Table  1.    Metrological  traceability  is  to  the  SI  derived  unit  for 
amount-of-substance  concentration  (expressed  as  millimoles  per  liter)  and  mass  concentration  (expressed  as 
milligrams per deciliter).  

 
 
Table 1a.  Certified Amount-of-Substance Concentration Values for SRM 1951c 

Amount 

 

 
 

 

Analyte 

Level 1 
(mmol/L) 

Level 2 
(mmol/L) 

Total Cholesterol 
Total Glycerides  

  3.943  ±  0.046 
  1.717  ±  0.036 

 
 

6.244  ±  0.072 
1.642  ±  0.036 

Table 1b.  Certified Mass Concentration Values for SRM 1951c 

 

Analyte 

Level 1 
(mg/dL) 

Level 2 
(mg/dL) 

Total Cholesterol 
Total Glycerides(a)  

  152.44  ±  1.78 
  152.0  ±  3.2 

  241.41  ±  2.80 
  145.4  ±  3.2 

ssed  as  triolein  in 

(a) Total glycerides results are expressed as triolein in milligrams per deciliter. 
 
 
the  means  of 
Reference Values:  Values for HDL-cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, and total cholesterol are based upon the means of 
results  from  analyses  at  CDC.    The  uncertainty  provided  with  each  reference  value  in  Table 2  is  an  expanded 
uncertainty, U, at the 95 % level of confidence, and is calculated according to the  method  described  in the ISO/JCGM 
Guide [11].  The measurand is the concentration value for each analyte listed in Table 2 as determined by the method or 
methods indicated.  Metrological traceability is to the SI derived unit for mass concentration (expressed as milligrams per 
deciliter).  
 

 
Table 2.  Reference Mass Concentration Values for HDL-Cholesterol, LDL-Cholesterol, and Total Cholesterol 

“oncentration

Analyte 

Level I 
(mg/dL) 

Level II 
(mg/dL) 

HDL-Cholesterol 
LDL-Cholesterol 
Total Cholesterol(a) 

  41.0  ±  0.9 
  86.4  ±  1.4 
  154.6  ±  1.1 

  64.9  ±  1.7 
  143.8  ±  2.1 
  244.8  ±  1.1 

(a) Total cholesterol as determined by the Abell-Kendall reference method [7]. 
 
 

 

SRM 1951c 

Page 3 of 4 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment 
of  Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136;  U.S.  Government 
Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (2000);  available  at  http://www.nist.gov/srm/publications.cfm  (accessed 
Jan 2018). 

[2]  Ellerbe, P.; Meiselman, S.; Sniegoski, L.T.; Welch, M.J.; White, V.E.; Determination of Serum Cholesterol by 
a  Modification  of  the  Isotope  Dilution  Mass  Spectrometric  Definitive  Method;  Anal.  Chem.,  Vol. 61, 
pp. 1718−1723 (1989). 

[3]  Edwards, S.H.;  Kimberly, M.M.;  Pyatt, S.D.;  Stribling, S.L.;  Dobbin, K.D.;  Myers, G.L.;  Proposed  Serum 
Cholesterol Reference Measurement Procedure by Gas Chromatography–Isotope Dilution Mass Spectrometry; 
Clin. Chem., Vol. 57, pp. 614–622 (2011). 

[4]  Ellerbe, P.; Sniegoski, L.T.; Welch, M.J.; Isotope Dilution Mass Spectrometry as a Candidate Definitive Method 
for Determining Total Glycerides and Triglycerides in Serum; Clin. Chem., Vol. 41, pp. 397−404 (1995). 
[5]  Edwards, S.H.;  Stribling, S.L.;  Pyatt, S.D.;  Kimberly, M.M.;  Reference  Measurement  Procedure  for  Total 

Glycerides by Isotope Dilution GC–MS; Clin. Chem., Vol. 58, pp. 768–776 (2012). 
JCTLM; available at http://www.bipm.org/en/committees/jc/jctlm/ (accessed Jan 2018). 

[6] 
[7]  Abell, L.L.;  Levy, B.B.;  Brodie, B.B.;  Kendall, F.E.;  A  Simplified  Method  for  the  Determination  of  Total 
Cholesterol in Serum and Demonstration of Its Specificity; J. Biol. Chem., Vol. 195, pp. 357–366 (1952). 
[8]  Myers, G.L.; Cooper, G.R.; Greenberg, N.; Kimberly, M.M.; Waymack, P.P.; Hassemer, D.J.; Standardization 
of Lipid and Lipoprotein Measurements; In Handbook of Lipoprotein Testing, 2nd ed., Rifai, N.; Warnick, G.R.; 
Dominiczak, M.H.,  Eds.;  American  Association  for  Clinical  Chemistry  (AACC),  Washington, D.C.,  
pp. 717–748. 

[9]  CDC/NIH; Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories, 5th ed.; Richardson, J.; Barkley, W.E.; 
Richmond, J.; McKinney, R.W., Eds.; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, 
CDC and National Institutes of Health; US Government Printing Office: Washington, D.C. (2009); available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/OD/OHS/biosfty/bmbl5/BMBL_5th_Edition.pdf (accessed Jan 2018). 

[10]  NCCLS;  Preparation  and  Validation  of  Commutable  Frozen  Human  Serum  Pools  as  Secondary  Reference 
Materials  for  Cholesterol  Measurement  Procedures;  NCCLS  Publication  C37-A,  National  Committee  for 
Clinical Laboratory Standards, Wayne, PA (2000). 

[11]  JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(GUM 1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Jan 2018);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results; NIST Technical Note 1297; U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (1994); available at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/tn1297/index.cfm (accessed Jan 2018). 

[12]  JCGM 101:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data – Supplement 1 to the Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty 
t  Committee 
in  Measurement  –  Propagation  of  Distributions  Using  a  Monte  Carlo  Method;  Joint  Committee 
for Guides in Metrology (JCGM) (2008); available at 
) 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_101_2008_E.pdf (accessed Jan 2018). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Certificate Revision History:  05 January 2018 (Change of expiration date; editorial changes); 23 November 2015 (Editorial changes); 27 June 
   
2013 (Original certificate issue date).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
(301)  948-3730; 
telephone 
 
accomplished  by  contacting 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

fax 

SRM 1951c 

Page 4 of 4 

