LUS.  Department  of  Commerce 
‘Fuanita  M.  Kreps 
Secretary 

National  Burese  of  Standards 
Ernest  Ambler.  Director 

Crystalline  Potassium  Iodide 

Heterochromatic  Stray  Radiant  Energy  Standard  for 
Ultraviolet  Absorption  Spectrophotometry 

K.  D.  Mielenz  and  R.  Mavrodineanu 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  consists  of  reagent-grade,  crystalline  potassium  iodide  (KI)  to  be  used  to 
assess  heterochromatic  stray  radiant  energy  (stray  light)  in  ultraviolet  absorption  spectrophotometers  in  the 
spectral  region  below  260  nm.  Stray  light  is  assessed  by  measuring  the  spectral  absorbance  of  aqueous  solutions 
of 
SRM  2032  of  known  pathlengths  and  concentrations,  and  comparing  the  result  with  the  certified  values  of the 
specific  absorbance,  e. 

Specific  Absorbance’ 

e(Lg 

cm’),  vs  Wavelength,  X  (nm),  at  23.5  °C 

  

240 

25.6 

€ 

245 

10.67 

250 

3.66 

255 

1.05 

260 

0.260 

265 

270 

275 

0.0560 

0.0121 

0.0031 

““S  necific  absorbance”  is  defined  here  as  absorbance  per  unit  pathlength  and  unit  concentration.  The  term  “absorptivity”  has  been  avoided 
since  it  is  ambiguously  defined.  See  K.  D.  Mielenz,  Anal.  Chem.  48,  1093-1094  (1976). 

The  estimated  uncertainty  of  these  values  is  +  5%,  which  includes  the  random  and  systematic  errors  of  the 
calibration  procedure,  as  well  as  variations  due  to  possible  instability  of  the  KI.  (See,  Certification  Procedure.) 

The  material  used  to  produce  SRM  2032  was  obtained  from  the  J. 
two  bottles,  as  reagent-grade  (99.8%  purity)  potassium  iodide, 

T.  Baker  Chemical  Co.,  Phillipsburg,  N.J.,  in 

SRM  2032  was  issued  with  the  technical  assistance  of  J.  R.  Baldwin,  R.  W.  Burke,  A.  L.  Cummings,  B.  I. 
Diamondstone,  and  G.  A.  Sleater,  and  under  the  overall  direction  of  1.  L.  Barnes. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  concerning  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  SRM  were 
coordinated  through  the  Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials  by  R.  W.  Seward. 

Washington,  D.C.  20234 
October  31,  1979 

George  A.  Uriano,  Chief 
Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials 

(over)

  

  

Material  Testing: 

Supplementary  Information 

Material  homogeneity  was  tested  by  measuring  the  absorbance  of  1%  aqueous  solutions  of the  KI  sampled  from 
the  top,  middle,  and  bottom  of  each  bottle.  These  measurements,  at  265,  267,  and  270  nm,  showed  no  evidence  of 
inhomogeneity.  Tests  for  moisture  content  (Karl  Fischer  method)  gave  an  average  of  0.007%.  This  vaiue  was 
sufficiently  small  that  all  certified  data  are  based  on  weighed  samples  of  the  undried,  as  received,  material. 

Stability  of  the  material  to  UV  and  visible  light  was  tested  by  exposing  the  KI  salt  in  a  low-actinic  glass  bottle  to 
radiation  from  a  3  kW  xenon-arc  lamp  at  a  distance  of  25  cm  for  four  days  at  room  temperature.  The  average 
absorbances  at  five  wavelengths  between  240  and  270  nm  of  aqueous  solutions  of  the  exposed  material  were 
1.1%  lower  than  those  of  solutions  of  the  unexposed  material.  In  view  of  the  severity  of this  test,  this  change  was 
considered  minor.  Nonetheless,  the  1.1%  was  included  in  the  overall  uncertainty  of  the  certified  values. 

Certification  Procedure: 

The  certified  specific  absorbances  were  measured  in  the  NBS  Center  for  Analytical  Chemistry  high-accuracy 
spectrophotometer  [1,  2},  equipped  with  a  deuterium  lamp  and  UV  averaging  sphere  [3,  4].  Thirteen  aqueous 
solutions  of  KI  with  concentrations  ranging  from  0.03  to.30  g  L!  were  prepared  and  measured  against  distilled 
water,  using  standard  fused-silica  cuvettes  with  pathlengths  between  10.001  and  10.009  mmm’,  The  absorbance 
measurements  were  performed  at  the  temperature,  t  =  23.5  +  0.5  °C.  A  0.2  nm  bandpass  was  used,  and 
wavelength  settings  were  made  with  an  accuracy  of  0.05  nm.  The  measurements  were  made  on  at  least  three 
concentrations  at  each  wavelength.  These  concentrations  were  chosen  so  that  most  absorbance  readings  fell 
between  0.1  and  1.0  to  minimize  stray  light  and  bandwidth  errors.  The  data  were  found  to  obey  Beer’s  law. 

Thus,  the  equation, 

e=A/coQ 

was  used  to  calculate  the  specific  absorbances,  ¢«,  from  the  measured  absorbances,  A,  and  the  known  values  of 
concentration,  c,  and  pathlength,  2 

. 

Limits  to  random  error  (two  standard  deviations)  of  these  measurements  (including  the  photometric 
imprecision  of  the  spectrophotometer,  errors  in  the  repositioning  of  cuvettes,  concentration  errors,  pathlength 
uncertainties,  temperature  errors,  Beer’s  law  uncertainties,  and  bandwidth  errors)  were  determined  to  be  + 
+  1.1% 
2.4%.  The  error  due  to  the  0.05  nm  uncertainty  of  the  wavelength  calibration  of the  spectrophotometer  is 

The  uncertainty  of  5%  stated  on  the  face  of  this  certificate  represents  the  sum  of  these  errors  and  the  above 
mentioned 
1.1%  uncertainty  due  to  instability  of  the  KI.  No  corrections  were  applied  for  the  effects  of  internal 
reflections  inside  the  sample  and  reference  cuvettes,  nor  were  the  weights  corrected  to  vacuum.  These  and  all 
other  sources  of  error  were  considered  negligible. 

The  temperature  coefficient  at  260  nm  was  determined  to  be 

(1) 

(2) 

] 

Gq  =  0.031 

de 

_ 

onl 

°C". 

For  precision  measurements,  it  is  recommended  that  SRM  2032  be  used  in  thermostated  cuvettes  at  23.5  °C,  or 
that  a  temperature  correction  according  to  Eq.  (2)  be  applied. 

"Issued  by  NBS  as  SRM  932,  Quartz  Cuvettes  for  Spectrophotometry.

Instructions  for  Use 

Storage  and  Preparation: 
SRM  2032  should  be  stored  in  the  original,  low-actinic  glass  bottle  and  the  cardboard  container  in  which  it  was 
issued  to  protect  it  from  unnecessary  exposure  to  light  and  humidity.  When  so  stored,  the  expected  stability  of 
this  material  is  at  least  three  years.  Thus,  until  additional  stability  data  are  obtained,  this  material  should  be  used 
within  three  years  of  the  date  of  purchase. 

Allsolutions  prepared  from  SRM  2032  should  be  made in  borosilicate  glass  containers  using  distilled  water  and 
transfer  pipettes  (Pasteur  type)  of  the  same  glass  and  fitted  with  rubber  bulbs’.  Use  clean  spectrophotometer 
cuvettes,  free  of  scratches,  made  of  non-fluorescent  fused  silica,  and  fitted  with  ground-glass  or  Teflon  stoppers 
to  minimize  evaporation;  or  preferably  use  NBS  SRM  932.  Mark  all  cuvettes  to  assure  the  same  orientation  in 
the  spectrophotometer,  and  place  them  into  their  respective  holders.  Using  transfer  pipettes  of  the  type 
mentioned,  rinse  each  cuvette  several  times  with  distilled  water.  Prepare  a  solution  of  KI  in  distilled  water  (e.g., 
1%),  fill  the  sample  cuvette  with  the  KI  solution  and  the  reference  cuvette  with  distilled  water.  Measure  the 
absorbance,  leaving  the  cuvettes  in  their  holders,  empty  them  (using  the  pipettes),  and  repeat  the  rinsing  and 
filling  operations  until  constant  absorbance  readings  are  obtained.  Fresh  solutions  should  be  made  before  every 
test. 

Measurements: 

A  1%  KI  solution  (c  =  10  g  vy  with  a  |  cm  pathlength  exhibits  a  sharp  cutoff  in  transmittance  near  260  nm;  i.e., 
it  transmits  more  than  90%  above  273  nm,  but  less  than  0.01%  below  258  nm.  Therefore,  with  the 
monochromator  set  for  a  wavelength  below  260  nm,  any  appreciable  amount  of  light  detected  is 
heterochromatic  stray  light,  which  consists  of  wavelengths  above  the  cutoff.  The  amount  of  stray  light  in  the 
spectrophotometer  at  wavelength  4  may  be  determined  from  the  equations: 

T(A)  = 

TOA)  +  x) 
1+  x(a) 

. 
x(A)  = 

TOAd-TA 
i-  TO) 

(3) 

4 
(4) 

where: 

x{)  is  the  stray  light  ratio, 

TA)  is  the  apparent  transmittance; 

T(A)  is  the  true  transmittance. 

The  stray  light  ratio,  x(A),  is  the  proportion  of  heterochromatic  stray  radiant  energy  in  the  spectrophotometer 
for  the  wavelength  setting  A.  Equation  (4)  forms  the  theoretical  basis  for  the  determination  of the  stray  light  ratio 
by  comparing  apparent  transmittance  to  true  transmittance.  For  SRM  2032,  the  true  transmittance,  T(A),  of  KI 
solutions  may  be  calculated  as: 

where  ¢(A)  is  the  certified  specific  absorbance  given  on  the  face  of  this  certificate. 

TA)  =  19 MEL 

“Soft  glass  containers  and  pipettes  contain  residual  amounts  of  UV  absorbing  material,  but  can  be  used  after  proper  cleaning.  Several  rinses, 
first  with  isopropyl  alcohol  and  then  with  distilled  water,  are  generally  adequate.

The  apparent  transmittances  of  KI  solutions  depend  not  only  on  the  stray  light  ratio  of  the  spectrophotometer, 
but  also  on  the  wavelength  accuracy  and  the  spectral  bandwidth,  which  can  significantly  affect  the  results 
obtained  because  of  the  steep  slope  of  the  absorbance  cutoff  of  KI.  A  low-pressure  mercury  discharge  lamp  is 
suggested  for  verifying  the  wavelength  scale,  and  a  bandwidth  as  narrow  as  compatible  with  adequate  signal-to- 
noise  ratios  should  be  used. 

| 

Many  instruments  do  not  permit  the  direct  measurement  of  transmittances 
below  certain  limits,  e.g.,  1%  or 
0.1%.  For  such  instruments,  the  use  of  SRM  2032  will  only  measure  stray  light  ratios  above  these  limits.  To 
measure  stray  light  ratios  below  these  limits,  the  reference  beam  of  the  spectrophotometer  must  be  attenuated  to 
extend  the  transmittance  scale  into  the  low-transmittance  region. 

References 

(1978). 

1. 

R.  Mavrodineanu,  J.  Res.  NBS  76A,  405-425  (1972). 

2.  J.F.  Barkley,  F.  C.  Ruegg,  and  R.  Mavrodineanu,  29th  Pittsburgh  Conf.,  Abstract  452,  Cleveland,  Ohio, 

3. 

K.  D.  Mielenz,  R.  Mavrodineanu,  and  E.  D.  Cehelnik,  J.  Res.  NBS  78A,  631-635  (1974). 

4. 

K.  D.  Mielenz,  R.  Mavrodineanu,  and  E.  D.  Cehelnik,  Appl.  Optics  14,  1940-1947  (1975).

