owe, 
Ne  g- 

Somes  or

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material 2061 

 

 
TiAl(NbW) Alloy for Microanalysis 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended for 
microanalysis of titanium (Ti) and aluminum (Al) in 
aerospace components and materials with  a similar matrix.  A unit  of SRM 2061 consists of a single cube of the 
alloy approximately 2 mm × 2 mm × 2 mm. 
 
Certified Values:  A NIST certified value is a value for which NI ST has the highest confidence in its accuracy, in 
that all known or suspected sources of bias have been inve stigated or accounted for by NIST.  A certified value is 
the present best estimate of the true value based on the results of analyses performed at NIST.  The uncertainty listed 
with the value is an  expanded uncertainty ( k = 2, 95 % confidence interval [1])  calculated in accordance with the 
ISO and NIST Guides [2].  
 
Certified values for titanium (Ti), aluminum (Al), niobium (Nb), and tungsten (W), expressed as mass fractions [2], 
are provided in Table 1.  The results  are expressed as the certified value  ± an expanded uncertainty.  The certified 
values are the unweighted averages of  the concentrations determined by wa velength dispersive X-ray fluorescence 
spectrometry (WD-XRF) and i nductively-coupled plasma  optical emission spectrome try (ICP-OES) [3].  The 
expanded uncertainties for Ti, Al, Nb, and W include the uncertainties attributable to the heterogeneity of these 
elements in addition to the uncertainties from the two quantitative methods. 
 
Heterogeneity testing on the micrometer scale (point-to- point, within specimens) was performed with wavelength 
dispersive electron probe microanalysis (WD-EPMA) while the bulk heterogeneity assessment (specime
n to 
specimen) was performed with WD-EPMA and WD-XRF.  Va lue assignment categories are based on the definition 
of terms and modes used at NIST for chemical reference materials [4]. 
 

Table 1.  Certified Values with Expanded Uncertainties for SRM 2061 

 

Mass Fraction 

53.92 
30.31 
10.78 
4.38 

 ±   0.34 
 ±   0.31  
 ±   0.10 
 ±   0.11 

 
 Element 
 (%) 
 
 Titanium 
 Aluminum 
 Niobium 
 Tungsten 
 
Expiration of Certification:   The certification of this SRM is valid until  01 January 2029 , within the uncertainty 
specified, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with the instructions given in this certificate 
(see “Instructions for Use”).  However, the certification will be nullified if the SRM is damaged or contaminated. 
 
Coordination of the technical meas
R.B. Marinenko of the NIST Surface and Microanalysis Division. 
 
Heterogeneity and microheterogeneity testing was performed by R.B. Marinenko and J. Kessler of the NIST Surface 
and Microanalysis Science Division and by R. Herrera-
Metrologia, Querétaro, Mexico. 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899  
Certificate Issue Date:  16 May 2005  

Richard R. Cavanagh, Chief 
Surface and Microanalysis Division 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

urements for certification was acco

mplished under the direction of 

Basurto, Guest Researcher 

from Centro Nacional de 

SRM 2061 

 

Page 1 of 3 

 
WD-XRF analytical measurements and  specimen to specimen heterogeneity te sting for certification of this SRM 
were performed at NIST by J.R. Sieber and A.F. Marlow of the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division.  ICP-OES 
analytical measurements for certification  were performed by L.L. Yu and T.A.  Butler, also of th e NIST Analytical 
Chemistry Division. 
 
Statistical consultation for this SRM was provided by S.D. Leigh of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
The support aspects involved in the issuance of this SRM were coordinated through the NIST Standa
Materials Program by B.S. MacDonald of the Measurement Services Division.   
 
Information Values:  An information value is considered to be a value that will be of interest and use to the SRM 
user, but insufficient information is available to assess the uncertainty associated with the value.  Information values 
for oxygen, and nitrogen are provided in Table 2.  The oxygen and nitrogen values are based on in
ert gas fusion 
(IGF) analysis. 
 

rd Reference 

Table 2.  Information Values for SRM 2061 

Mass Fraction 
(%) 

 
 Element 
  
 
 Oxygen 
 Nitrogen 
 
Stability:   This material is considered to be stable during th e period of certification.  NIST will monitor this SRM 
cal changes occur that affect  the certification before the 
over the period of its certification.  If substantive techni
expiration of this certificate, NIST  will notify the purchaser.  Registratio
notification. 
 
PREPARATION, HETEROGENEITY, AND ANALYSIS1 
 

n (see attached sheet) will facilitate 

0.232  
0.004 

Material Preparation:   The material for SRM 2061 was fabricated at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base 
(Dayton, OH).  It was extruded in the form of a 2.4 cm diameter rod that was annealed at 1370 
°C to produce only 
the α-phase of the alloy.  The rod was cut into 23 disks, 2  mm thick, that were marked on the unpolished side with a 
number and letter to identify their original locations in the rod.   These disks were polished at NIST on one side and 
cleaned for EPMA heterogeneity testing.   Upon completion of the heterogeneity tests, six of the disks were sliced 
into 2 mm  × 2 mm × 2 mm cubes with a diamond saw.  Most of the cubes were retained for use as SRM 2061 for 
microanalysis while a few were used for quan titative analyses by WD-XRF, ICP-OES, and IGF.
disks were retained for use as SRM 2062. 
 
Heterogeneity:  Each of the 23 disks were tested with WD-EPMA for heterogeneity using three independent 
sampling strategies: 

    The remaining 

1.  40-point traverses using 2 µm steps – 2 traverses normal to one another per specimen 
2.  20 random point samplings per specimen 
3.  Nested design sampling using 3 duplicate readings on 4 randomly selected points per specimen to 
determine the variances for the between specimen and the between points heterogeneities [5].   

 
The total uncertainties determ ined from test No. 3 are included in th
element.  In addition, 15 disks were tested for between specimen heterogeneity with WD-XRF. 
 
Analysis:   For WD-XRF analysis [6], acid digestion of single cu bes of the alloy (6 total,  approx. 40 mg each) was 
followed by borate fusion with a pre-fused flux (50:50 mix of Li 2B4O7 and LiBO 2).  Calibration was accomplished 
using synthetic calibrants designed to match the fused unknowns and prepared from high-purity compounds.  The 
K L2,3 (Kα) X-ray lines for Al, Ti, and Nb and the L3-M4,5 (Lα) lines for W were used in the analysis.   

e certified uncertainties assigned to each 

                                                 
 
the experimental procedure.  Such identification does not im ply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology. 

1Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this certificate in order to adequately specify 

SRM 2061 

 

Page 2 of 3 

 

 
For ICP-OES analysis [6], single cubes of the alloy were digested in HCl and HF.  Manganese was used as an
internal standard.  For each element, calibration was accom plished with six matrix-matched standards and a linear 
calibration model.  The analytes Al, Ti, Nb, W, and the internal standard, Mn, were measured side-on with respect to 
the plasma at 394.401 nm, 337.279 nm, 269.706 nm, 239.708 nm, and 260.568 nm, respectively.  Analyses 
were 
done on two different days and averaged. 
 
Oxygen and nitrogen were analyzed by Luvak, Inc. (Boylston, MA) using IGF.  Two of the 2 mm  × 2 mm  × 2 mm 
cubes were used for duplicate analyses of both elements. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE2 
 
Storage:  The alloy should be stored in a closed container such as a plastic box, in a cool, dry location, preferably a 
desiccator, to avoid dust or moisture contamination.   
 
Use:  To relate analytical determinations to the values on this certificate of analysis, the specimen  must be mounted 
in an appropriate medium such as epoxy and polished for  analysis in the electron micr oprobe or scanning electron 
microscope.  Appropriate conduction of electrons from the specimen to ground must be provided  to avoid charging.  
Other microanalytical techniques may require different preparative procedures for use.   The specimen shoul
d be 
handled with clean, powder-free gloves to avoid contamination with body oils and foreign matter.  Avoi d contact of 
any kind with the polished surface once it 
is clean and dry.  If repolishing is  necessary, particles of the polishing 
material may adhere to or become imbedded in  the surface.  Most can be removed with Scotch ® Removable Magic® 
Tape or similar transparent (“invisible”) tape followed by thorough rinsing with heptane to ensure r
emoval of any 
remaining tape adhesive.  Once polis hed and cleaned, the specimen may requ ire occasional repolishing depending 
upon how often it is used and how much electron beam contamination occurs.   
 
Minimum Sample Quantity:   Based on the microheterogeneity assessment, the sampling of at least 10 different 
randomly selected 1-µm points is recommended for Al, Ti, and Nb. A 20-point sampling is recommended for W.    
 
 

 
[1]  Hahn, G.J.; Meeker, W.Q.;  Statistical Intervals:  A Guide for Practitioners ; John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: New 

REFERENCES 

York (1991). 

[2] ISO; G

uide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement

; ISBN 92-67-10188-9, 1st ed.; International 

Organization for Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland (1993); see also Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines 
for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results
U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (1994); available at http://physics.nist.gov/Pubs/. 

; NIST Technical Note 1297; 

[3]  Levenson, M.S.; Banks, D.L.; Eberha rdt, K.R.; Gill, L.M.; Guthrie, W.F.; Liu, H-K.; Vangel, M.G.; Yen, J.H.; 
Zhang, N.F.;  An Approach to Combining Results from Multiple Methods Motivated by the ISO GUM ; J. Res. 
Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol.; Vol. 105, pp. 571–579 (2000). 

[4]  May, W.E.; Parris, R.M.; Beck II, C.M.; Fassett, 

J.D.; Greenberg, R.R.; Guen ther, F.R.; Kramer, G.W.; 
Wise, S.A.; Gills, T.E.; Colbert, J. C.; Gettings, R.J.;  MacDonald, B.S.;  Definitions of Terms and Modes Used 
at NIST for Value-Assignment of Refere nce Materials for Chemical Measurements ; NIST Special Publication 
260–136, p.16; U.S. Government Printing Office:  Washington, DC; (2000). 

[5]  Marinenko, R.; Leigh, S.;  Heterogeneity Evaluation of Research Materials for Microanalysis Standards 

Certification, Microsc. Microanal. Vol. 10, pp 491–506 (2004). 

raceability  and  Uncertainty  in  Alloy  Analysis  by  Borate
[6]  Sieber, J.R; Yu, L.L.; Marlow, A.F.; Butler, T.A.;  Traceability and Uncertainty in Alloy Analysis by Borate 

Fusion and XFR; X-Ray Spectrom., Vol. 34, pp. 153-159 (2004). 

 
 
 
 
 
Users of this SRM should ensure that the certificate in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished by 
contacting the SRM Program at:  telephone (301) 975-6776; fax (301) 926-4751, email srminfo@nist.gov; or via 
the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

                                                 

2Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this certificate in order to adequately specify 

the experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology. 

SRM 2061 

 

Page 3 of 3 

