owe, 
Ne  g- 

Somes  or

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material 2062 

 

 
TiAl(NbW) Alloy 

 
This Standard Reference Material (S RM) is intended for use in X-ray fluorescence analysis of titanium-aluminum 
(Ti-Al) aerospace alloys although it may be a useful reference for other methods of analysis.  A unit of SRM 2062 is 
a flat, polished disk approximately 2.4 cm diameter and 2 mm thick. 
 
Certified Values:  A NIST-certified value is a value for which NI ST has the highest confid ence in its accuracy, in 
that all known or suspected sources of bias have been inve stigated or accounted for by NIST.  A certified value is 
the present best estimate of the true value based on the results of analyses performed at NIST.  The uncertainty listed 
with the value is an  expanded uncertainty ( k = 2, 95 % confidence interval [1])  calculated in accordance with the 
ISO and NIST Guides [2]. 
 
Certified values for titanium (Ti), aluminum (Al), niobium (Nb), and tungsten (W), expressed as mass fractions [2], 
are provided in Table 1.  The results  are expressed as the certified value  ± an expanded uncertainty.  The certified 
values are the unweighted averages of  the concentrations determined by wa velength dispersive X-ray fluorescence 
spectrometry (WD-XRF) and i nductively-coupled plasma  optical emission spectrome try (ICP-OES) [3].  The 
expanded uncertainties for Ti, Al, Nb, and W include the uncertainties attributable to specimen heterogeneity of 
these elements in addition to the uncertainties from the two quantitative methods.   
 
ngth 
Testing of the specimen to specimen heterogeneity was performed with WD-XRF and as part of the wavele
dispersive electron probe microanalysis (WD-EPMA) of  these specimens. Value assignment categories are based on 
the definition of terms and modes used at NIST for chemical reference materials [4]. 
 

Table 1.  Certified Values with Expanded Uncertainties for SRM 2062 

Mass Fraction 

 
 Element 
 (%) 

 

 

53.92 
30.31 
10.78 
4.38 

 ±   0.34  
 ±   0.31  
 ±   0.10  
 ±   0.11 

 Titanium 
 Aluminum 
 Niobium 
 Tungsten 
 
 
Expiration of Certification:   The certification of this SRM is valid until  01 January 2029 , within the uncertainty 
specified, provided the SRM is handled a nd stored in accordance with the instructions given in this certificate (see 
“Instructions for Use”).  However, the certification may be nullified if the SRM is damaged or contaminated. 
 
Coordination of the technical meas
R.B. Marinenko of the NIST Surface and Microanalysis Division. 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899  
Certificate Issue Date:  16 May 2005  
 

Richard R. Cavanagh, Chief 
Surface and Microanalysis Division 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

urements for certification was acco

mplished under the direction of 

SRM 2062 

 

Page 1 of 3 

from Centro Nacional de 

Basurto, Guest Researcher 

Heterogeneity and microheterogeneity testing was performed by R.B. Marinenko and J. Kessler of the NIST Surface 
and Microanalysis Science Division and by R. Herrera-
Metrologia, Querétaro, Mexico. 
 
WD-XRF quantitative characterization as well as specimen to specimen heterogeneity testing for certification of this 
SRM were performed at NIST by J.R. Sieber and A. F. Marlow of the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division.  
ICP-OES quantitative characterization for certification were  performed by L.L. Yu and  T.A. Butler, also of the 
NIST Analytical Chemistry Division.     
 
Statistical consultation for this SRM was provided by S.D. Leigh of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
The support aspects involved in the issuance of this SRM were coordinated through the NIST Standa
Materials Program by B.S. MacDonald of the Measurement Services Division.   
 
Information Values:  An information value is considered to be a value that will be of interest and use to the SRM 
user, but insufficient information is available to assess the uncertainty associated with the value.  Information values 
ert gas fusion 
for oxygen, and nitrogen are provided in Table 2.  The oxygen and nitrogen values are based on in
(IGF) analysis. 
 

rd Reference 

Table 2.  Information Values for SRM 2062 

0.232  

Nitrogen 0.004 

Mass Fraction 
(%) 

 
 Element 
  
 
 Oxygen 
 
 
Stability:   This material is considered to be stable during th e period of certification.  NIST will monitor this SRM 
over the period of its certification.  If substantive techni
cal changes occur that affect  the certification before the 
expiration of this certificate, NIST  will notify the purchaser.  Registratio
notification. 
 
PREPARATION, HETEROGENEITY, AND ANALYSIS1 
 
Material Preparation:   The material for SRM 2062 was fabricated at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base 
(Dayton, OH).  It was extruded in the form of a 2.4 cm diameter rod that was annealed at 1370 
°C to produce only 
the α-phase of the alloy.  The rod was cut into 23 disks, 2  mm thick, that were marked on the unpolished side with a 
number and letter to identify their original locations in the rod.   These disks were polished at NIST on one side and 
cleaned for EPMA heterogeneity testing.   Upon completion of the heterogeneity tests, six of the disks were sliced 
into 2 mm  × 2 mm × 2 mm cubes with a diamond saw.  Most of the cubes were retained for use as SRM 2061 for 
microanalysis while a few were used for quan titative analyses by WD-XRF, ICP-OES, and IGF.
disks were retained for use as SRM 2062. 
 
Heterogeneity:  Each of the 23 disks were tested with WD-EPMA for heterogeneity using three independent 
sampling strategies: 

n (see attached sheet) will facilitate 

    The remaining 

1.  40-point traverses using 2 µm steps – 2 traverses normal to one another per specimen 
2.  20 random point samplings per specimen 
3.  Nested design sampling using 3 duplicate readings on 4 randomly selected points per specimen to 
determine the variances for the between specimen and the between points heterogeneities [5].   

 
The total uncertainties determ ined from test No. 3 are included in th
element.  In addition, 15 disks were tested for between specimen heterogeneity with WD-XRF. 

e certified uncertainties assigned to each 

                                                 

1Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this certificate in order to adequately specify 

the experimental procedure.  Such identification does not im ply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, nor does it imply  that the materials or equipment identified  are necessarily the best available for t he 
purpose. 
 

SRM 2062 

 

Page 2 of 3 

 

Analysis:  For WD-XRF analysis [5], acid digestion of single  cubes of the alloy (6 tota l, approx. 40 mg each) was 
followed by borate fusion with a pre-fused flux (50:50 mix of Li 2B4O7 and LiBO 2).  Calibration was accomplished 
using synthetic calibrants designed to match the fused unknowns and prepared from high-purity compounds.  The 
K L2,3 (Kα) X-ray lines for Al, Ti, and Nb and the L3-M4,5 (Lα) lines for W were used in the analysis.   
 
For ICP-OES analysis [5], single cubes of the alloy were digested in HCl and HF.  Manganese was used as an
internal standard.  For each element, calibration was accom plished with six matrix-matched standards and a linear 
calibration model.  The analytes Al, Ti, Nb, W, and the internal standard, Mn, were measured side-on with respect to 
were 
the plasma at 394.401 nm, 337.279 nm, 269.706 nm, 239.708 nm, and 260.568 nm, respectively.  Analyses 
done on two different days and averaged. 
 
Oxygen and nitrogen were analyzed by Luvak, Inc. (Boylston, MA) using IGF.  Two of the 2 mm  × 2 mm  × 2 mm 
cubes were used for duplicate analyses of both elements. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE2 
 
Storage:  The alloy should be stored in a closed container such as a plastic box, in a cool, dry location, preferably a 
desiccator, to avoid dust or moisture contamination.   
 
Use:  To relate analytical determinations to the values on
specimen must be used in XRF analysis.  Avoid analysis of the region within 1 mm of the ed
ge of the specimen.  
Handle the specimen with clean, powder-free gloves to avoid contamination with body oils  and any kind of foreign 
matter.  Avoid contact of any kind with the polished surface once it is clean and dry.  If repolishing is required, 
particles of the polishing material may adhere or become imbedded in the surface.  Most can be removed with 
Scotch® Removable Magic ® Tape or similar transparent (“invisible”) tape followed by thorough rinsing with 
heptane to ensure removal of any remaining tape adhesive.   
 
Minimum Sample Quantity:   For X-ray fluorescence spectrometry, practi cally any beam size may be used.  The 
material is suitable for measurement by micro X-ray fluorescence spectrometry in wh
ich small X-ray beams are 
er and based on the microheterogeneity assessment, the 
employed.  For beams smaller than about 1 mm in diamet
sampling of at least 10 different randomly selected points is recommended for Al, Ti, and Nb.  A 20-point sampli ng 
is recommended for W. 
 

 this certificate of analysis, the polished side of the 

REFERENCES 
 
[1]  Hahn, G.J.; Meeker, W.Q.;  Statistical Intervals:  A Guide for Practitioners ; John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: New 

York (1991). 

[2] ISO; G

uide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement

; ISBN 92-67-10188-9, 1st ed.; International 

Organization for Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland (1993); see also Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines 
for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results
U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (1994); available at http://physics.nist.gov/Pubs/. 

; NIST Technical Note 1297; 

[3]  Levenson, M.S.; Banks, D.L.; Eberha rdt, K.R.; Gill, L.M.; Guthrie, W.F.; Liu, H-K.; Vangel, M.G.; Yen, J.H.; 
Zhang, N.F.;  An Approach to Combining Results from Multiple Methods Motivated by the ISO GUM ; J. Res. 
Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol.; Vol. 105, pp. 571–579 (2000). 

[4]  May, W.E.; Parris, R.M.; Beck II, C.M.; Fassett, 

J.D.; Greenberg, R.R.; Guen ther, F.R.; Kramer, G.W.; 
Wise, S.A.; Gills, T.E.; Colbert, J. C.; Gettings, R.J.;  MacDonald, B.S.;  Definitions of Terms and Modes Used 
at NIST for Value-Assignment of Refere nce Materials for Chemical Measurements ; NIST Special Publication 
260–136, p.16; U.S. Government Printing Office:  Washington, DC; (2000). 

raceability  and  Uncertainty  in  Alloy  Analysis  by  Borate
[5]  Sieber, J.R; Yu, L.L.; Marlow, A.F.; Butler, T.A.;  Traceability and Uncertainty in Alloy Analysis by Borate 

Fusion and XFR; X-Ray Spectrom., Vol. 34, pp. 153-159 (2004). 

 
 
Users of this SRM should ensure that the certificate in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished by 
contacting the SRM Program at:  telephone (301) 975-6776; fax (301) 926-4751, email srminfo@nist.gov; or via 
the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

                                                 

2Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this certificate in order to adequately specify 

the experimental procedure.  Such identification does not im ply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, nor does it imply  that the materials or equipment identified  are necessarily the best available for t he 
purpose. 
 

SRM 2062 

 

Page 3 of 3 

