National 

Institute  of  Standards  &  Technology 

Gerttficate  of  Analysis 

Standard  Reference  Matenal  2063a 

Microanalysis  Thin  Film  Mg-S1-Ca-Fe 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  intended  for  use  in  the  standardization  of  chenucal  analysis  by  xray 
and  energy  loss  spectrometry  on  the  analytical  electron  microscope.  This  film  may  be  used  to  detertune  relative 
sensitivity  factors  as  described  in  mary  references  [e.g  1,2].  SRM  2063a  consists  of  a  mineral  glass  film  that  has 
been  deposited  onto  a  20-nm  thick  carbon  support  film  on  a  3-mim  diameter,  copper  transmission  electron 
microscope  prid.  The  thickness  and  density  of  the  film  have  been  determined  and  are  presented  as  supplemental 
information. 

The  certified  values  for  Me  Si  Ca,  Fe,  and  O,  erren  below,  are  based  on  measurements  mace  using  several 
anakytical  techniques.  The  value  for  Ar  in  parenthesis  is  not  certified  but  is  grren  for  information  only. 

Certified  Concentration 
Yo  by  weight 

Unicertamty 
Yo  by  weight? 

Ele  ment 

Me 
ral 
a 
Fe 
tl) 
At 

0.34 
U.98 
0.37 
0.88 
1.6 

®  The  certified  value  listed  for  an  element  is 
techniques  [4,4]. 

a  weighted  mean  valie  pooling  results  from  several  anabytical 

®  The  stated  uncertainty  includes  allowances  for  measurement  imprecision,  material  variability,  and  differences 
Each  uncertainty  is  the  sum  of  the  half-width  of  a  95%  prediction  interval  and  an 
among  analytical  methods. 
allowance  for  systematic  error  among  the  methods  used. 
In  the  absence  of  systematic  error,  a  93%  prediction 
interval  precicts  where  the  true  concentrations  of  95%  of  the  samples  of  this  SRM  Lie.  [3,4]. 

The  overall  direction  and  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  certification  were  under  the 
direction  of  EB.  Steel  and  RA.  Velapoldi,  Chief,  NIST  Surface  and  Microanalysis  Science  Drvision. 

eitatistical  anakysis  of  the  certification  data  was  provided  by  5.D.  Leigh  and  3.6.  Schiller  of  the  Statistical 
Engineering  Drrision. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  certification  and  issuance  of  this  Standard  Reference  Material 
were  coordinated  through  the  Standard  Reference  Materials  Program  by  J.5.  Kane. 

Gattherstuug,  MD  20899 
February  12,1995 

William  P.  Reed,  Chief 
nitandard  Reference  Materials  Program 

7.OF 
25.44 
11.82 
11.06 
432 
(0.4) 

Cover

  

Use:  The  dark  side  of  the  copper  grid  contains  the  glass  film  supported  by  carbon.  The  datk  side  should  face  the 
x-tay  detector  for  calibration  procedures.  High  electron  beam  doses  (above  approximately  10-7 
cm”)  may  cause 
instability  in  the  chemucal  composition  of  the  thin  film.  For  this  reason  itis  suggested  that  onby  defocussed  beams 
or  scanned  area  analyses  be  used  onthis  standard  anc  that  the  anabkrst  test  for  beam  damage  by  anahraing  at  several 
beam  currents. 

Preparation:  The  films  were  prepared by  JM.  Phelps  of  the  NIST  Surface  and  Microanalysis  Research  Diision 
using  focussed  argon  ion  beam  sputtering  from  a  glass  target  onto  the  copper  support  grids.  The  glass  target  was 
fabricated by  D1.  Blackburn  and  D.  Kauffman  of  the  NIST  Ceramics  Drvision. 

Chemical  Analysis: 
Electron  probe  microanalysis,  analytical  electron  microscopy,  xray  fluorescence,  and/or 
time-of-flight  secondary  ion  mass  spectrometry  were  used  to  determine  the  chemical  composition  of  the  Mg,  41, 
(a,  Fe,  and  Olin  the  thin  film.  The  Ar  content  was  calculated  using  a  Monte  Carlo  program  and  the  measured  x-ray 
intensities  from  the  films.  Trace  concentrations  of  Ni,  Cr,  and  Min  were  also  observed  in  the  films.  The  analysts 
were  JA.  Bennett,  JM.  Phelps,  and  EB.  Steel  of  the  MIST  Surface  and  Microanalysis  Science  Drision. 

The  thickness  of  the  films  was  measured by  profilometry  and  was  found  to  be  76  nm  with  95%  confidence  limits 
oftdinm.  A  density  of  3.1  gfe’?  with  95%  confidence  limits  of  $0.3  g/cm?  was  calculated  from  the  measured 
thickness,  area,  and  mass  of  the  thin-film  depositions.  These  values  are  not  certified  but  are  erren  for  information 
only. 

eupplemerital  Information 

REFERENCES 

fl]  Clie  &.,  and  Lorimer,  GW,  7.  Micros,  Vol.  110,  p.  107,  c1  975). 
[2]  Joy,  DUC.  et  al,  eds.,  Principles  of Analytical  Electron  Microscopy,  Plenum  Press,  New  York,  (1986). 
[3]  Paule,  RC.  and  Mandel  J,  Consensus  Values  and  Weighting  Factors,  J].  Res.  Nat.  Bur.  Stand.  (U3),  87, 

(2)  377-385  (Sept-Oct,  1982). 

[4]  Schiller,  3.8,  and  Ebethardt,  ER,  Combining  Data  from  Independent  Chenucal  Anabrsis  Methods, 

apectrochim.  Acta,  46D,  12,  pp.  1607-1613,  19913. 

3.

