National  Institute  of  Standards  &  Technology 

Certificate  of  Analysis 

Standard  Reference  Material  2072 

Sinusoidal  Roughness  Specimen 

Serial 

No. 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  certified  for  roughness  average,  Ra,  and  surface  wavelength,  D,  and  is  intended  for 
use  as  a  standard  for  the  calibration  of  stylus  instruments  that  are  used  to  measure  surface  roughness.  The  SRM  is  a  steel 
block  of  nominal  Knoop  hardness  500  which  has  been  nickel  coated  by  the  electroless  nickel  process.  A  sinusoidal  roughness 
profile  was  machined  onto  the  top  surface  of  the  specimen  in  a  facing  operation  by  a  singie-point,  diamond  tool  on  a 
numerically  controiled  lathe. 

The  roughness  average,  Rg,  is  the  average  absolute  deviation  of  the  surface  peaks  and  valleys  about  the  mean  line  and  is 
defined  in  the  ANSI  Standard  B46.1  entitled  "Surface  Texture".  The  surface  wavelength,  D  is  the  average  period  of  the 
sinusoidal  surface  profile. 

The  parameters  R,  and  D  were  calculated  from  roughness  profiles  of  the  SRM’s  measured  with  a  stylus  instrument  interfaced 
to  a  minicomputer  and a  laser  interferometer.  The  profiles  were  measured  following  the  procedures  in  ANSI  Standard  B46.1. 
The  instrument  was  operated  in  the  skidless  mode  with  an  external  reference  datum.  The  cutoff  length  was  0.8  mm  and  Lhe 
sampling  rate  was  1  point  per  wm  over  the  traversing  length  of  4.0  mm.  The  stylus  instrument  was  calibrated  using  an 
interferometrically  measured  step,  and  the  stylus  had  a  tip  width  of  2.0  +  0.4  um.  The  width  is  defined  to  be  the  distance 
between  the  two  points  of  contact  when  the  stylus  tip  profile  is  inscribed  in  a  150°  angle. 

The  certified  Rg  and  D  values  for  this  specimen  are: 

Roughness  Average  (Ra),  wm 

Surface  Wavelength  (D),  um 

+  0.027 

101.64  +  0.24 

The  technical  direction  and  physical  measurements  leading  to  certification  were  provided  by  T.V.  Vorburger  and  C.H.W. 
Giauque  of  the  Center  for  Manufacturing  Engineering  and  J.F.  Song,  guest  researcher. 

Guidance  on  statistical  analysis  was  provided  by  M.C.  Croarkin  of  the  NIST  Statistical  Engineering  Division. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  Standard  Reference  Material 
were  coordinated  through  the  Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials  by  R.L.  McKenzie. 

Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 
December  16,  1989 

: 

(Over) 

William  P.  Reed,  Acting  Chief 
Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials 

  

  

 

The  specimens  were  machined  by  Pneumo  Precision,  Inc.  of  Keene,  N.H.  using  a  single-point,  diamond  tool  in  a  facing 
operation  with  a  numerically  controlled  tool  path.  The  surface  profile  is  sinusoidal  to  a  high  approximation  but  shows  a  fine- 
scale  structure  when  the  surface  is  scanned  at  high  resolution,  as  is  shown  in  Figure  1.  The  upper  profile  shown  in  Figure  1 
was  obtained  with  a  stylus  of  width  4  um.  The  lower  profile  was  obtained  with  a  stylus  of  width  0.5  um.  The  fine-scale 
structure  has  a  spacing  of  approximately  4.2  4m.  This  structure  may  be  useful  for  monitoring  the  quality  of  fine  stylus  tips 
or  for  checking  zero-crossing  and  peak-counting  techniques  in  surface  profile  analysis. 

The  certified  values  represent  average  values  of  18  profile  traces  taken  in  pairs  at  each  of  nine  distributed  positions  on  the 
specimen  as  shown  in  Figure  2.  The  certification  is  valid  within  the  area  defined  by  the  extremes  of  these  profile  traces. 
Because  of  the  curvature  in  the  surface  markings,  the  value  for  D  outside  the  limits  of  the  measured  area  is  expected  to 
increase. 

The  stylus  force  was  approximately  4x104N.  This  force  should  cause  negligible  damage  to  the  hard  metal  surface;  however, 
faint  stylus  traces  may  be  visible  on  the  surface. 
Repeated  use  with  stylus  instruments  can  slowly  degrade  roughness 
specimens;  however,  the  specimen  is  expected  to  maintain  its  calibration  value  for  at  least  five  years  provided  that 
measurements  are  taken  on  clear,  undamaged  areas. 

The  uncertainties  for  Ra  and  D  are  sums  of  instrument  calibration  uncertainties  and  random  uncertainties. 
Sources  of 
calibration  uncertainty  for  Rg  include:  (1)  the  uncertainty  of  the  height  of  the  calibrating  step,  (2)  the  uniformity  of  the 
calibrating  step,  (3)  variations  in  the  measured  values  caused  by  digital  sampling  processes  and  software  computations,  (4) 
nonlinearities  in  the  transducer  and  interface  hardware,  and  (5)  uncertainty  in  the  stylus  width.  The  calibration  uncertainty  for 
R,  is  0.018  wm  and  the  random  uncertainty  (3  standard  deviations)  is  0.009  um. 

Sources  of  calibration  uncertainty  for  the  interferometric  measurement  of  D  include  the  wavelength  fitting  procedure,  changes 
The 
in  the  laboratory  environment,  possible  cosine  errors  in  the  specimen  alignment,  and  a  possible  Abbe  offset  error. 
calibration  uncertainty  for  D  is  0.03  pm  and  the  random  uncertainty  (3  standard  deviations)  is  0.21  ym. 
The  random 
uncertainties  for  Rg  and  D  were  obtained  from  prediction  intervals,  and  they  take  into  account  instrumental  variation  and 
positional  variation  on  the  SRM. 

4  um  Stylus 

0.5  um  Stylus 

Figure  1,  Representative  surface  profile  traces  of  SRM  2072  using  a  4  um  stylus  (upper  trace)  and 

a  0.5  um  stylus  (lower  trace). 

 

  

  

  

     
    Serial 

Number 

Figure  2.  Measurement  Positions  for  SRM  2072.  Positions  of  traces  in  mm  with 
respect  to  the  upper  left  comer,  C,  of  the  roughness  area. 

 

 

  

  

