eT  OF  Coy, 

a 

 
s
t

 
a

 
,
p
D

 
)
i
g

 
.

 
.

 
8
0
2

 
.
n
e
W
"

 
&

 
,
s
 
e
M
n
 “

Staves  OF y

National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Certificate 
Standard Reference Material® 2098 

 

 

achines 
Standar: 

 
Super-High-Energy Charpy V-Notch Specimens 
 
(NIST-Verification, 8-mm Striker) 
 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended for the verification of Charpy machines equipped with an 8-mm 
striker, in accordance with the current ASTM Standard E23 [1] and the current ISO Standard 148-2 [2].  Each SRM 
consists of a set of specimens needed to perform a single verification.  
 
Material Description:  SRM 2098 is made from 9310 alloy steel.  The bars are finished to length, heat-treated, and 
machined in SRM specimen lots ranging in size from 1200 to 2000 specimens.  Each specimen has a lot number and 
an identification number (three or four digits). 
 
SRM  Certification  Procedure:    Specimens  from  each  SRM  lot  are  tested  by  the  NIST  Applied  Chemicals  and 
Materials Division on Charpy reference machines.  These data are statistically evaluated to ensure the homogeneity 
of the lot, establish the certified value, and determine the number of SRM specimens required for a user to perform a 
valid test.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy, in that all 
known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [3].  The measurand is absorbed 
energy as measured by the NIST Charpy reference machines.  Traceability is to the SI unit joule. 
 
The certified value of the SRM is not given on this portion of the certificate.  The certified value and the uncertainty 
associated  with  it  are  given  in  the  verification  letter  that  is  issued  by  NIST  following  the  verification  test  (see 
“Verification of the User’s Machine”).  If certified values are required immediately after testing, you can contact the 
NIST  Charpy  Program  Coordinator  as  follows:    telephone  (303)  497-3351;  fax  (303)  497-5939;  or  e-mail 
charpy@boulder.nist.gov.  The lot number, machine serial number, and absorbed energy results of the tested specimens 
must be provided in order to obtain certified values. 
 
Expiration  of  Certification:    The  certified  value  and  uncertainty  furnished  in  the  verification  letter  are  valid 
indefinitely.  The verification statement in the letter that is issued for an acceptable machine is valid for a maximum 
of one year from the date on which the SRM was tested.  If a user’s machine is moved or undergoes any major repairs 
or adjustments, the current verification will be invalidated, and the machine must be reverified (see “Instructions for 
Handling, Storage, and Use”). 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantial 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Overall  direction  and  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  certification  of  test  specimens  and 
machines, evaluation of test results, and issuance of the report on machine conformance are under the direction of the 
NIST Applied Chemicals and Materials Division, Boulder,  CO. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  06 September 2019 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

John D. Perkins, Chief 
Applied Chemicals and Materials Division 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

ttificatio

SRM 2098 

Page 1 of 2 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
Handling:  The protective oil coating should be wiped from each specimen with a lint-free cloth just prior to testing. 
 
Storage:  The SRMs are anticipated to have an indefinite shelf life under normal storage conditions (20 °C ± 20 °C, ≤ 50 % 
relative humidity).  
 
Use:    Prior  to  verifying  a  Charpy  machine  equipped  with  an  8-mm  striker,  the  machine  should  be  checked  to  ensure 
compliance  with  the  appropriate  sections  of  the  applicable  ASTM  or  ISO  Standard.    SRM  2098  shall  be  tested  at 
21 °C ± 1 °C (70 °F ± 2 °F), in accordance with the applicable standard (ASTM or ISO).  The energy level of the SRM 
appropriate for verifying the performance of a particular Charpy impact machine can be determined by considering the 
energy range that should be expected for the SRM, the maximum capacity of the machine, and the requirements of the 
applicable test method (ASTM or ISO).  The certified energy of SRM 2098 specimens is typically within the range of 
176 J to 244 J. 
 
Verification of User’s Machine:  The NIST Charpy Program Coordinator will issue a verification letter to the user’s 
facility  upon  receipt  of  the  fractured  specimens  and  completed  questionnaire.    Fractured  specimens  and  completed 
questionnaire should be returned to the NIST Charpy Program Coordinator, Mail Code 647, 325 Broadway, Boulder, CO 
80305-3337.  A plastic, self-locking bag is provided for the return of broken specimens.  The broken specimens shall be 
taped  together  as  described  in  the  wrapping  instructions  included  with  the  questionnaire.    The  verification  letter  is 
considered to be the second part of this certificate, and includes the certified value and uncertainty of the SRM. 
 
Shipping  Information:    Shipping  charges  for  the  return  of  broken  specimens  are  the  responsibility  of  the  user.    The 
mailing  label  provided  with  each  SRM  shall  be  used  to  expedite  shipping  and,  for  overseas  shipments,  clearance  by 
U.S. Customs. 
 
Note to International Customers:  Regular overseas shipments of broken specimens should be sent airmail so that after 
they are cleared by U.S. Customs, they can be forwarded directly to NIST-Boulder.  If a more rapid shipping mode is 
necessary,  choose  an  overnight  delivery  service  that  will  handle  U.S.  Customs  clearance  AND  will  deliver  directly  to 
NIST-Boulder.  Unless such delivery is assured, air freight packages may be returned to the customer by U.S. Customs. 
 
 

REFERENCES 

 
[1] ASTM E23; Standard Test Methods for Notched Bar Impact Testing of Metallic Materials; Annual Book of ASTM 

Standards, Vol. 03.01, ASTM, West Conshohocken, PA. 

[2] ISO 148-2;  Metallic  Materials  −  Charpy  Pendulum  Impact  Test  −  Part  2:  Verification  of  Testing  Machines; 

International Organization for Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland. 

[3] May, W.; Parris, R.; Beck II, C.; Fassett, J.; Greenberg, R.; Guenther, F.; Kramer, G.; Wise, S.; Gills, T.; Colbert, J.; 
Gettings, R.;  MacDonald, B.;  Definition  of  Terms  and  Modes  Used  at  NIST  for  Value-Assignment  of  Reference 
Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office: 
Washington, DC (2000); available at 
https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/srm/SP260-136.PDF( accessed Sep 2019). 

 
 
 
 
  
  
torial  changes); 
Certificate Revision History:  06 September 2019 (Title updated; editorial changes); 20 December 2013 (Editorial changes); 13 June 2013 (Lot number 
   
removed from title; editorial changes); 25 January 1991 (Original SRM lot certificate date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users of this SRM should ensure that the Certificate in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished by contacting 
the  SRM  Program:  telephone  (301)  975-2200;  fax  (301)  948-3730;  e-mail  srminfo@nist.gov;  or  via  the  Internet  at 
https://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 2098 

Page 2 of 2 

