. 
   National Institute of Standards and Technology 

 
a

 
*
o

7 
Staves  of  ©

 

Certificate 
Standard Reference Material® 2135c 

 

 
Ni/Cr Thin Film Depth Profile Standard 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  calibrating  sputtered  depth  scales  and  erosion 
rates in surface analysis. Its periodic structure, consisting of eight well-defined metal/metal interfaces, can be used to 
obtain accurate calibration at a number of depths.  SRM 2135c is certified for total Chromium (Cr) and Nickel (Ni) 
thickness,  single  element  layer-to-layer  uniformity,  Ni  and  Cr  bilayer  uniformity  (periodicity)  and  single  layer 
thickness [1-3].  Certified thickness values, expressed in units of mass/area, are given in the section entitled Certified 
Values and Uncertainties.  
 
A unit of SRM 2135c consists of nine alternating metal thin-film layers, five layers of pure chromium and four of 
pure nickel, on a polished silicon (100) substrate. The individual layers have thicknesses that are nominally 57 nm 
for Cr and 56 nm for Ni.  The area of the specimen that is certified is determined by the full width of the substrate 
(1.0 cm) and a length of 2.0 cm centered on the 2.54 cm length of the substrate (see Figure l). 
 
Expiration  of  Certification:    The  certification  of  this  SRM  is  deemed  to  be  indefinite  within  the  measurement 
uncertainties specified provided the SRM is handled, stored, and used in accordance with the instructions provided 
in this certificate.  However, the certification will be nullified if the SRM is altered, contaminated or damaged.   
 
This  SRM  was  fabricated  by  RF  magnetron  sputtering  at  COMSAT  Laboratories,  Clarksburg,  MD,  under  the 
direction of L.B. Holdeman and E.R. Sparks. 
 
Auger Sputter Depth Profile analyses were performed by L. Tanovic, N. Tanovic, and J. Fine of the NIST Surface 
and  Microanalysis  Science  Division.    X-ray  Fluorescence  (XRF)  Spectrometry  measurements  were  performed  by 
P.A.  Pella  and  A.F.  Marlow  of  the  NIST  Analytical  Chemistry  Division.    Inductively  Coupled  Plasma  (ICP) 
Spectrometry measurements were performed by R. Saraswati, L.J. Wood, and M.S. Epstein of the NIST Analytical 
Chemistry Division.  Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS) Sputter Depth Profile analyses were performed by 
D.S. Simons and P.H. Chi of the NIST Surface and Microanalysis Science Division. 
 
Statistical consultation was provided by K.R. Eberhardt and J.H. Yen of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
  
The overall direction and coordination of the technical measurements leading to certification were performed by 
J. Fine of the NIST Surface and Microanalysis Science Division. 
 
The  technical  and  support  aspects  concerning  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  SRM  were 
coordinated through the Standard Reference Materials Program by R.J. Gettings. 
 
 

Rance A. Velapoldi, Chief 
Surface and Microanalysis Science Division 

 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  1 February 1999 

 

Thomas E. Gills, Chief 
Standard Reference Materials Program 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SRM 2135c 

 

Page 1 of 5 

CERTIFIED VALUES AND UNCERTAINTIES   
 
A.    Total  Cr  and  Total  Ni  Thicknesses:    The  total  certified  thickness  and  expanded  uncertainties  of  the  five  Cr 
layers  and  the  total  thickness  of  the  four  Ni  layers  were  determined  by  XRF  and  ICP  using  a  gravimetrically 
calibrated reference. 
 

 

Element             

Certified Total Thickness 

  Cr 
  Ni 

   
   

206.3 μg/cm2   ±  13.8 μg/cm2 
197.4 μg/cm2   ±   9.6 μg/cm2 

 
The  uncertainties  of  the  certified  total  thicknesses  are  expressed  as  expanded  uncertainties  at  the  95  %  level  of 
confidence, and are calculated according to the guidelines described in Reference [4].  An expanded uncertainty is 
calculated as U = kuc, where the coverage factor, k = 2, corresponds to 95 % confidence, and where uc is intended to 
represent, at the level of one standard deviation, the measurement uncertainty.  The stated uncertainties are due to 
three components:  uncertainty due to ICP calibration, between-specimen differences (obtained by wide field XRF), 
and within-specimen differences (obtained by small field XRF), see Tables l and 2. Additional information regarding 
within-specimen  uniformity  was  provided  by  SIMS  analysis.    The  within-specimen  differences  indicate  that 
variations exist in the total Cr and Ni thicknesses over the central 1.0 cm X 2.0 cm certified area.  
 
B.    Single  Element Layer-to-Layer Uniformity and Ni + Cr Bilayer Uniformity (periodicity):  Layer-to-layer 
thickness  uniformity  of  the  Cr  and  Ni  layers  was  determined  by measuring the ion bombardment time required to 
remove individual layers of the same element by sputter erosion.  This time was obtained by monitoring the surface 
composition by Auger spectroscopy using 50 % intensity criteria (see Figure 2) during sputter profiling.  Analysis 
was obtained over a region of the surface about 10 μm in diameter.  The uniformity of the Ni + Cr bilayer removed, 
was determined in a similar manner. 
 

Certified Layer-to-Layer Uniformity 
(relative standard deviation in %) 

 
Type of Layer 
 
 

 

 
 

Single Cr Layer 

Single Ni Layer 

Bilayer 

 

0 8
.

.
0 9

0 6
.

+

−
+

21
.
0 6
.
.
15

−
+

−

0 6
.
2 2
.
0 5
.

 

 

 

 

 
The  uncertainties  in  the  certified  values  are  expressed  as  95  %  confidence  intervals.    These  calculations  involved 
several steps.  First, for a particular element or bilayer, the layer-to-layer relative standard deviations obtained from 
the  different  batches  using  Auger  spectroscopy  were  pooled  into  a  sample  and  re-expressed  using  a  logarithmic 
transformation.  If ฀ and uy  are the sample mean and standard deviation of the transformed values, then the certified 
relative  uniformity  is  calculated  as  exp  (฀)  and  the  confidence  interval  has  the  form  exp  (฀  ±  k  uy),  where  the 
coverage  factor,  k  =  2.365,  is  determined  from  the  Student’s  t-distribution  with  7  degrees  of  freedom  and  95  % 
confidence.  As shown in the uncertainty statements, such confidence intervals are not symmetric about the certified 
values.   
 
C.  Single Layer Thickness:  The certified thickness for single layers of a given element was obtained from the total 
layer thickness for that element and the number of layers present.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  uncertainty  of  a  certified  single  layer  thickness  is  expressed  as  an  expanded  uncertainty  at  the  95  %  level  of 
confidence,  and  is  calculated  according  to  the  guideline  described  in  Reference  [4].    An  expanded  uncertainty  is 

           
Certified Single Layer Thickness  

 41.3 μg/cm2  ±  2.8 μg/cm2 
 49.4 μg/cm2  ±  2.6 μg/cm2  

 
  Element  

    Cr 
    Ni 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

SRM 2135c 

Page 2 of 5 

 

 
 

 

calculated as U = kuc, where the coverage factor, k = 2, corresponds to 95 % confidence, and where uc is intended to 
represent, at the level of one standard deviation, the measurement uncertainty.  The uncertainty of the single layer 
thickness of an element is determined by combining the uncertainty of the average total thickness of that element, 
which  is  described  in  section  A  of  this  certificate,  and  the  uncertainty  of  the  layer-to-layer  uniformity  of  that 
element, which is described in section B.    
 
Structure Description:  The silicon substrate was lightly sputter etched in situ to obtain a clean, amorphous surface 
for layer deposition.  Metal thin-film structures were produced by RF magnetron sputter deposition beginning with a 
layer of Cr.  This was followed by alternate layers of Ni and Cr with Cr forming the outermost layer, (see Figure 1). 
Dimensions of the substrate are 1.0 cm X 2.54 cm X 0.04 cm, with the films deposited on the largest surface.  The 
layered face is the more reflective surface. 
 
Instructions for Use:  Information on material composition as a function of depth at surfaces and interfaces can be 
obtained  by  monitoring  the  elemental  surface  concentration  as  successive  surface  layers  are  sputter-removed  at 
known rates by ion bombardment.  SRM 2135c is intended primarily to provide a means for determining sputtered 
depths as well as sputter erosion rates in surface analysis.  Determination of sputtered depth can be made at seven 
depths with this one SRM using metal/metal interfaces of known spacings.  The well-ordered structure of this SRM 
makes  it  useful  for  verifying  correct  instrument  operation,  monitoring  ion  beam  current-density  stability,  and 
producing sputtering conditions that achieve maximum interface resolution. 
 
The thin-film metal layers can be distinguished as the more reflective surface of this SRM.  The outer Cr layer is not 
intended for depth calibration purposes but can be useful for ion beam current measurement and specimen alignment. 
 Sputtered depth and rate measurement can begin at the outermost Cr/Ni interface using, for example, 50 % of maximum 
elemental  signal  intensity  as  a  reference  point  for  layer  removal  measurement.  Greater  accuracy  of  sputter  removal 
times and depths can be obtained from a periodicity measurement for the removal of a Ni + Cr bilayer pair. 
 
An example of an Auger sputter depth profile obtained with this SRM is shown in Figure 2. 
 
Relative Sputtering Rates and Yields of Ni and Cr Using Argon Ion Bombardment (not certified): 
 

Ion Energy 
    (keV)      

 

Ni Rate*/Cr Rate 
 

 

Ni Yield**/Cr Yield 

 
 
 
 
 

 

  1.0 
  2.0 
  3.0 
  4.5 

1.03 
1.07 
1.09 
1.09 

1.12 
1.17 
1.20 
1.20 

*Rate is expressed in units of length/time 
**Yield is expressed as number of atoms sputtered per incident ion 
 
Expressing Layer Thicknesses in Units of Length:  The certified layer thicknesses could be converted into units of 
length (nm) if the densities of the layers were known.  As these densities are not known, an approximate thickness 
can be derived by using the known bulk densities for Cr (7.19 g cm-3) and Ni (8.9 g cm-3); the values so obtained are 
57 nm for Cr and 56 nm for Ni. 
 
Cautions to User:  The usefulness of SRM 2135c for sputter rate calibration depends on maintaining a constant ion 
current density at the point of analysis.  Care must be taken to ensure that the ion beam current remains constant and 
that the beam position on the specimen remains fixed. 
 
Precise determination of a reference point for layer removal measurement requires that the single layer profiles be 
clearly resolved (i.e., flat topped profiles) so that the sputtered interface regions are well defined. 
 
Foreign surface particulates should be removed before profiling by use of clean, pressurized gas; it is not advisable 
to use solvents for cleaning as they can leave some residue. 

SRM 2135c 

 

Page 3 of 5 

Ni/Cr Multilayered Thin-Film 
Standard Reference Material 

 
 

 
 

@
e
—
e
—
®
 
—
—
 

A
y
s
u
a
y
u
|
 

 
 

 
 
Figure 1.  Sectional view of the thin-film multilayered SRM structure.  The nominal thickness of each Cr layer is 
57 nm and each Ni layer is 56 nm. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Auger sputter depth profile representative of SRM 2135c obtained using 1 keV argon ion bombardment.  
The pure Ni and Cr Auger intensities shown have been normalized. 

Sputtered  Depth  [nm]

 
 —
 

J
o
B
n
y
 

 
 

 
 

(
3
)
N
 

_
@
—
e
—
—
e
-
*
 

3
 

©
 

@
 

SRM 2135c 

 

Page 4 of 5 

 
Table l.  Identification of Uncertainties:  Total Thickness of Cr 

Relative Standard Uncertainty 

Source 
 
ICP Measurement 
Between Specimen Differences 
(Wide Field-XRF) 
Within-Specimen Differences 
(Small Field-XRF) 
 
 
Combined Standard Uncertainty, uc 
Coverage Factor, k 
Expanded Uncertainty, U = kuc  
 

Source 
 
ICP Measurement  
Between-Specimen Differences  
(Wide Field-XRF) 
Within-Specimen Differences  
(Small Field-XRF) 
 
 
Combined Standard Uncertainty, uc   
Coverage Factor, k 
Expanded Uncertainty, U = kuc   
 

1.33 % 
1.12 % 

2.85 % 

3.34 % 
2 
6.68 % 

1.52 % 
1.46 % 

1.22 % 

2.44 % 
2 
4.88 % 

Table 2.  Identification of Uncertainties:  Total Thickness of Ni 
 

Relative Standard Uncertainty 

 

 

 
 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Fine, J. and Navinsek, B., “Characterization of NBS Standard Reference Material 2135 for Sputter Depth Profile 

Analysis,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A3, p. 1408, (1985). 

[2]  Fine,  J.,  Lindfors,  P.A.,  Gorman,  M.E.,  Gerlach,  R.L.,  Navinsek,  B.,  Mitchell,  D.F.,  and  Chambers,  G.P., 
“Interface  Depth  Resolution  of  Auger  Sputter  Profiled  Ni/Cr  Interfaces:  Dependence  on  Ion  Bombardment 
Parameters,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A3, p. 1413, (1985). 

[3]  Fine, J. and Navinsek, B., “An NBS Standard Reference Material for Depth Profile Analysis,” Surf. Interface 

Anal. 11, p. 542, (1988). 

[4]  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in  Measurement,  ISBN  92-67-10188-9,  lst  Ed.  ISO,  Geneva, 
Switzerland,  (1993):    see  also  Taylor,  B.N.,  and  Kuyatt,  C.E.,  “Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the 
Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement  Results,”  NIST  Technical  Note  1297,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office, 
Washington DC, (1994). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  certificate  in  their  possession  is  current.  This  can  be  accomplished  by 
contacting  the  SRM  Program  at:    Telephone  (301)  975-6776  (select  “Certificates”),  Fax  (301)  926-4751,  e-mail 
srminfo@nist.gov, or via the Internet http://ts.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 2135c 

 

Page 5 of 5 

