National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 2139 

 

 
Zinc-Aluminum Alloy  
 
(In cooperation with the ASTM International) 
 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is in the form of milled chips intended for use with chemical methods of 
analysis.  This material is one in a series of seven zinc base alloys prepared to cover a range of aluminum and lead 
compositions of interest to the zinc and galvanizing industries.  The other zinc alloys in this series are SRMs 1736, 
1737,  1738,  1739,  1740,  1741,  and  1742,  all  in  disk  form.    SRM  1739  is  the  same  material  as  SRM  2139  but 
supplied in disk form. 
 
Certified values for aluminum and lead are given in Table 1.  The analytical methods used for the characterization 
of this SRM were flame atomic absorption spectrometry (FAAS) and inductively coupled plasma optical emission 
spectrometry (ICP-OES).  All values are reported as mass fractions [1]. 
 
Certified  Values  and  Uncertainties:    A  NIST-certified  value  is  the  present  best  estimate  of  the  true  value  for 
which  NIST  has  the  highest  confidence  in  its  accuracy,  in  that  all  known  or  suspected  sources of bias have been 
investigated or accounted for by NIST.  Each certified value is the mean of the laboratory means.  The uncertainty 
in  each  certified  value  is  expressed  as  the  expanded  uncertainty,  U,  at  the  95  %  level  of  confidence,  and  is 
calculated according to the method described in the ISO Guide [2].  The expanded uncertainty is calculated as U = 
kuc,  where  uc  is  intended  to  represent,  at  the  level  of  one  standard  deviation,  the  combined  effects  of  material 
inhomogeneity, and between-laboratory and within-laboratory components of uncertainty.  The coverage factors, k 
= 2.57 for Al and k = 2.37 for Pb are determined from the Student’s t-distribution corresponding to five and seven 
degrees of freedom, respectively, and 95 % confidence for each analyte.  
 
Expiration  of  Certification:    The  certification  of  SRM  2139  is  valid  indefinitely,  within  the  measurement 
uncertainties  specified,  provided the SRM is handled in accordance with instructions given in this certificate (see 
“Instructions for Use”).  This certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or modified.   
 
Analytical consultation was provided by J.R. Sieber of the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the NIST Measurement Services 
Division. 
 
Statistical analyses of the homogeneity and certification data were provided by S.B. Schiller and N.F. Zhang of the 
NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Gaithersburg, MD  20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  31 July 2008 
See Certificate Revision History on Page 3 

SRM 2139 
 

Stephen A. Wise, Chief 
Analytical Chemistry Division 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Standard Reference Materials Program 

 

Page 1 of 3 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 
 
On  the  basis  of  the  test  methods  used  for  value  assignment,  it  is recommended to use a minimum sample size of 
1.0 g to obtain results representative of the values and uncertainty estimates given on this certificate.  When not in 
use, the material should be stored in its original container in a cool, dry location. 
 

Table 1.  Certified Values for SRM 2139 Zinc-Aluminum Alloy 

 

 

 

Element  

 

Mass Fraction, in % 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Aluminum 
Lead 

0.2042  ±  0.0105 
0.0302  ±  0.0010 

 
 
 
 
Overall  coordination  of  the  material  preparation,  development  of  the  analytical  procedures  to  be  used  to  produce 
certification data, and identification of the laboratories to participate in this study was provided by S. Bélisle of the 
Centre  de  Technologie  Noranda,  Pointe-Claire,  Québec,  Canada  and  T.  Beckwith  of  the  Zinc  Corporation  of 
America, Monaca, PA, USA.   
 
Alloy  Preparation:    Each  alloy,  using  Special  High  Grade  (SHG)  zinc  ingots  as  the  base  material,  was 
continuously  cast  (concast)  into  bars  3  m  in  length,  then  cut  into  1.5  m  sections  for  shipment.    The  material  was 
cast, under contract, by Zincaloy Inc.1, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada.  Homogeneity testing of each cast material 
was  performed  under  the  direction  of  T.  Beckwith  by  the  Zinc  Corporation  of  America,  Monaca,  PA,  USA.    At 
NIST,  samples  for  homogeneity  testing  were  cut  from  the  Start  (S)  and  Finish  (F)  ends  of  each  rod.    Following 
NIST evaluation of the homogeneity data, all the rods for SRMs 1736, 1737, 1738, 1740, 1741, and 1742 were cut 
into disks.  For SRM 1739, half of the rods were made into disks while the remaining rods were milled to produce 
chips and designated SRM 2139.  Disks from each SRM were then selected in accordance with the NIST statistical 
plan, milled into chips, and samples were sent to the laboratories participating in the study. 
 
Collaborating Laboratories: 
 
Zinc Corporation of America, Monaca, PA, USA; T. Beckwith and M. Shiring 
Centre de Technologie Noranda, Pointe-Claire, Québec, Canada; S. Bélisle and  M. Habib 
Big River Zinc Corporation, Sauget, IL, USA, G. Fogleman 
Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Co., Ltd., Flin Flon, Manitoba, Canada; W. Friesen 
Falconbridge Ltd., Kidd Creek Division, Timmins, Ontario, Canada; D. McGuire 
Asturiana de Zinc, S.A., Avilés (Asturias), Spain; C. Muruzábal 
Industrial Minera Mexico, S.A. de C.V., San Luis Potosi, S.L.P., Mexico; M. Nolan 
Union Miniere, BU Zinkraffinage, Balen, Belgium; R. Pankert 
Met-Mex Penoles, S.A. de C.V., Torreon, Coah, Mexico; A. Trevino and M. Ramirez O. 
Norzink AS, Odda, Norway; V. Vetti and J. Preim 
Outokumpu Zinc Oy, Kokkola, Finland; T. Witting and J. Urpinen 

                                                 

1 Certain commercial equipment, instrumentation, or materials are identified in this certificate to specify adequately the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the NIST, nor does it imply that 
the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
 
SRM 2139 
 

Page 2 of 3 

 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Taylor, B.N.; Guide for the Use of the International System of Units (SI), NIST Special Publication 811, U.S. 

Government Printing Office:  Washington, DC (1995). 

[2]  ISO;  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in  Measurement;  ISBN  92-67-10188-9,  1st  ed.,  International 
Organization for Standardization:  Geneva, Switzerland (1993); see Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for 
Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement  Results;  NIST  Technical  Note  1297, 
U.S. Government Printing Office:  Washington, DC (1994). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certificate Revision History:  31 July 2008 (Removal of expiration date and editorial changes); 26 October 1998 (Original certificate date). 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  certificate  in  their  possession  is  current.  This  can  be  accomplished  by 
contacting the SRM Program at:  telephone (301) 975-2200; Fax (301) 926-4751; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via 
the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 2139 
 

 

Page 3 of 3 

