U. 

S.  Departaitent’  of  Commerce 

Maurice. H.  Stans 

“ed  Standards 
,  Director 

Gertificate  of  Analysis 

Standard  Reference  Material  2141 

Urea 

R.  A.  Paulson  and  W.  P.  Schmidt 

This  standard  reference  material  is  certified  for  use  in  the  calibration  and  standardization  of 
microchemical  procedures  for  the  determination  of  nitrogen  in  organic  matter.  It  is  also  useful  for 
the  standardization  of  techniques  for  the  determination  of  nitrogen  in  which  carbon  and  hydrogen 
are  determined  simultaneously. 

Nitrogen.  .........  46.63  £0.02  percent 

The  uncertainty  shown  represents  the  95  percent  confidence  interval of  the  mean  based  on 
24  determinations  and  allows  for  the  effects  of  known  sources  of  possible  error.  Nitrogen  was 
determined  by  a  modification  of  the  AOAC  micro-Kjeldahl  method  in  which  the  boric  acid  solution 
was  replaced  by  0.05  N  hydrochloric  acid  solution.  Analysis  of  stnall  samples  (0.6  mg)  indicate  the 
material  to  be  homogeneous  within  the  limits  of  the  technique  used. 

Analytical  measurements  to  further  characterize  this  material  were  performed  by  R.  Schaffer, 

R.  F.  Brady,  Jr.,  B.  Coxon,  and  J.  Thomas  of  the  Analytical  Chemistry  Division. 

The  overall  direction  and  coordination  of  technical  measurements  leading  to  the  certification 

were  under  the  chairmanship  of  J.  K.  Taylor. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  concerning  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of 
this  standard  reference  material  were  coordinated:  through  the  Office  of  Standard  Reference 
Materials  by  T.  W.  Mears. 

Washington,  D.  C.  20234 
August  28,  1970 

| 

J.  Paul  Cali,  Acting  Chief 
Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials 

(over)

  

Nitrogen  was  determined  by  a  modification  of  the  AOAC  micro-Kjeldahl  method  in  which  the 
boric  acid  absorbing  solution  was  replaced  by  0.05  N  hydrochloric  acid  solution.  Urea  samples  of 
approximately  50  mg  were  accurately  weighed  and  transferred  to  30-ml  Kjeldahl  flasks.  Mercuric 
oxide,  potassium  sulfate,  and  sulfuric  acid  were  then  added  and  the  samples  digested  for  al  least 
2  hours.  The  ammonia  was  distilled  off  and  absorbed  in  50  ml  of  standardized  0.05  N  hydrochloric 
acid  solution.  The  excess  acid  was  Litrated  with  standardized  sodium  hydroxide  solution  to  a  pil  of 
5.5.  To  be  certain  that  all  of  the  ammonia  had  distilled,  the  first  absorber  was  replaced  by  a  second 
containing  5  ml  of  boric  acid  solution  and  the  ammonia  absorbed  titrated  directly  with  standard 
acid  using  methyl  purple  indicator.  It  was  found  that  when  the  first  distillation  ran  for  10  minutes. 
the  titration  of  the  second  distillation  did  not  exceed  0.10  ml  of  standard  acid. 

For  homogeneity,  24  samples  were  selected  from  the  bulk  material  and  analyzed  according  to 
a  statistical  plan.  There  was  no  evidence  of  variability  of  nitrogen  content  between  samples  beyond 
that  observed  within  samples.  There  was  no  evidence  of  systematic  differences  in  analytical  values 
due  to  day-to-day  variability  nor  Lo  the  order  in  which  the  samples  were  taken. 

An  estimate  of  the  homogeneity  of  small  (0.6  mg)  samples  was  made  using  a  commercial 
carbon-hydrogen-nitrogen  analyzer.  The  urea  was  found  to  be  homogeneous  in  respect  to  these 
elements  within  the  limit  of  precision  of  the  analytical  method. 

Phase-solubility  analysis  using  isopropyl!  alcohol  indicated  a  minimum  purity  of  99.8  percent. 
be  0.002  percent.  The  biuret  content  was 
Insoluble  matter  and  ash  were  both  determined  to 
determined  to  be  0.07  percent.  Mass  spectrometric  examination  indicated  no  detectable  im  purities. 
The  moisture  content  as  determined  by  the  Karl  Fischer  titration  method  ts  0.05  percent. 

A  satisfactory  method  for  further  drying  this  standard  reference  material  was  not  found. 
Either  incomplete  drying,  or  excessive  (and  progressive)  weight  loss  occurred,  depending  on  the 
degree  and  intensity  of  heating  and  evacuation.  However,  it  was  found  that  this  material  showed 
lose  weight  (+  0.003  percent)  when  exposed  to  laboratory  air  for  a 
little  tendency  to 
two-week  period.  Hence,  the  analyses  were  performed  on  this  standard  reference  urea  without 
is  recommended  that,  after  the  withdrawal  of  portions 
attempting  to  lower  its  moisture  content.  It 
of  the  standard  reference  material,  the  container  should  be  tightly  closed.  Thus  protected,  it  may  be 
assumed  that  the  moisture  content  of  the  standard  reference  material  will  remain  unchanged. 

gain  or 

This  standard  reference  material  is  useful  for  the  calibration  of  the  various  procedures  for  the 
microchemical  determination  of  nitrogen  including  those  in  which  the  determination  of  carbon  and 
hydrogen  is  performed  simultancously.  While  highly  precise  determinations  of  carbon  and  hvdrogen 
were  not  made,  the  value  obtained  for  the  nitrogen  content  and  other  supporting  evidence  indicate 
is  recommended  that  the  stoichiometric  values,  namely 
the  urea  to  be  of  high  purity.  Therefore,  it 
carbon  =  20.00  percent  and  hydrogen  =  6.71  percent,  be  used  for  the  latter  application.

