U.S.  Departrgenty  of  Commerce 
Frederick  B. Dent 

    
‘ichard  Ws Reherts,  Director 

National  Bureau  of  Standards 
Certificate 

Standard  Reference  Material  2144 

m-Chlorobenzoic  Acid 

W.  P.  Schmidt 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  is  certified  for  use  in  the  calibration  and  standardization  of 

microchemical  procedures  for  the  determination  of  chlorine  in  organic  material. 

Chlorine  2...  0.2.  ec 

eee  teens 

22.62  =  0.05  wt.  percent 

The  uncertainty  shown  represents  the  95  percent  confidence  interval  of  the  mean  based  on  16 
determinations  and  allows  for  the  effects  of  known  sources  of  possible  error.  Chlorine  was  deter- 
mined  by  both  the  micro-Carius  method  and  the  macro-sodium  peroxide  bomb  method. 

The  m-chlorobenzoic  acid is  a  highly  purified  commercial  material.  Analytical  measurements  to 

further  characterize  the  material  were  performed  by  J. 

E.  Fearn  and  E.  E.  Hughes. 

The  overall  direction  and  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  certification 

were  performed  under  the  chairmanship  of  J.  K.-Taylor. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this 
Standard  Reference  Material  were  coordinated  through  the  Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials 
by  T.  W.  Mears. 

Washington,  D.C.  20234 
April  5,  1973 

J.  Paul  Cali,  Chief 
Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials 

(over)

Chlorine  was  determined  both  by  the  micro-Carius  method  and  by  the  macro-sodium  peroxide 
fusion  method.  Six  samples  were  received,  and  at  least  one  determination  by  each  method  was  made 
on  each  bottle.  The  material  represented  by  these  samples  is  considered  to  be  homogeneous  within 
the  limit  of  experimental  error. 

Using  the  Carius  method,  accurately  weighed  20  mg  samples  were  digested  in  0.5  ml  fuming 
nitric  acid  and  15  mg  of  silver  nitrate  for  12  hours  at  250  °C.  After  cooling  the  tubes  were  opened 
and  the  contents  diluted  with  water.  Following  a  digestion  period  the  silver  chloride  was  filtered  on 
a  weighed  micro-filter  tube.  The  average  value  for  8  determinations  was  22.65  +  0.03  weight 
percent. 

Using  the  sodium  peroxide  bomb  method,  300  mg  samples  were  mixed  with  15 

g  of  sodium 
peroxide-sugar  mixture  (14:1)  in  a  Parr  peroxide  bomb  and  ignited.  The  resulting  melt  was  washed 
from  the  bomb  and  the  solution  boiled  to  destroy  peroxides.  The  solution  was  made  acid  with  nitric 
acid  and  sufficient  0.1  N  silver  nitrate  solution  added  to  precipitate  all  of  the  chloride.  The 
precipitate  of  silver  chloride  was  collected  on  a  weighed  fritted-glass  filter.  The  average  value  for  8 
determinations  was  22.59  +  0.01  weight  percent. 

Carbon  and  hydrogen  were  determined  on  each  sample  using  a  commercial  carbon-hydrogen- 
nitrogen  analyzer.  Carbon  found  was  53.71  wt.  percent,  hydrogen  3.25  wt.  percent.  The  neutraliza- 
tion  equivalent  was  found  to  be  99.8  percent  of  that  calculated  for  m-chlorobenzoic  acid.  Differ- 
ential  scanning  calorimetry  indicates  a  purity  of  about  99.7  mole  percent.  Mass  spectrometric 
examination  showed  no  detectable  impurities.

