National Institute of Standards & Technology 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 2206 

 

 
Controlled Pore Glass - BET Specific Surface Area 
 
(Nominal Pore Diameter 300 nm)  

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended for the calibration and performance testing of instruments used 
for the determination of the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) specific surface area (SSA) by the static volumetric gas 
sorption  technique.    A  unit  of  SRM 2206  consists  of  one  bottle  containing  approximately  5.1 g  of  high-purity 
granulated  controlled-pore  glass  with  a  nominal  pore  diameter  of  300 nm.    This  SRM  is  certified  for  BET  SSA 
determined by nitrogen gas sorption at liquid nitrogen temperature (77.3 K) using commercial instrumentation.  
 
Certified  Values:    Certified  values  for  the  single-point (SP)  and  multiple-point (MP)  BET  analysis  of  specific 
surface area are listed in Table 1.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its 
accuracy in that all known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [1].  Certified 
values are based on measurements performed at NIST and validated by qualified collaborating laboratories [2].  
 

Table 1.  Certified Values for BET Specific Surface Area(a) 

Measurement Technique 

Specific Surface Area Value  

 

MP 

SP 

(m2/g) 

10.99    0.68 

10.73    0.68 

 
(a) The assigned value is a weighted mean of the results from measurements of ten bottles of the material using a Gaussian, linear 
mixed  effects  model [2].  The  uncertainty  listed  with  the  value  is  an  expanded  uncertainty  with  coverage  factor  k = 2, 
corresponding to a 95 % confidence interval, calculated by Monte–Carlo simulation of uncertainty components using methods 
from the ISO Guide or its Supplement [3,4].  It includes between-bottles as well as within-bottle heterogeneity components, 
plus an additional type B evaluated component. 

 
Expiration  of  Certification:    The  certification  of  SRM 2206  is  valid  indefinitely,  within  the  measurement 
uncertainty  specified,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  in  accordance  with  instructions  given  in  this  certificate  (see 
“Instructions for Handling, Storage, and Use”).  Accordingly, periodic  recertification  of  this  SRM  is  not  required.  
However, the certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified.  
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor the certified values of this SRM; if substantive technical 
changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification,  NIST  will  notify  the  purchaser.    Registration  (see  attached  sheet)  will 
facilitate notification.  
 
Coordination of the technical measurements for certification was accomplished under the direction V.A. Hackley of 
the  NIST  Ceramics  Division.    Certification  measurements  were  performed  at  NIST  by  V.A. Hackley.    Material 
selection, procurement, and production aspects were carried out by W. Haller, V.A. Hackley, and J.F. Kelly of the 
NIST Ceramics Division.  
 
Statistical consultation for this SRM was provided by B. Toman of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division.   
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  27 April 2012 

Robert. L Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

Debra L. Kaiser, Chief 
Ceramics Division 

SRM 2206 
 

Page 1 of 3 

 

 

Validation  measurements  were  provided  by  P. Klobes  from  Bundesanstalt  für  Materialforschung  und  -prüfung 
(Berlin, Germany);  R. Ahmad  of  Quantachrome  Corporation  (Boynton  Beach, FL, USA)  and  J. Kenvin  of 
Micromeritics Instrument Corporation (Norcross, GA, USA). 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Measurement  Services 
Division. 
 
Heterogeneity  Assessment:    Ten  units  were  selected  using  a  stratified  random  sampling  procedure  and  used  for 
certification and heterogeneity testing at NIST based on BET SSA measurements.  Analysis of these ten units was 
randomized, and two samples were tested from each of the ten units. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
Handling:  SRM 2206 is granular with a grain size principally larger than 130 µm, resulting in good flowability to 
enable  ease  of  sampling  and  transfer  operations.    The  material  is  composed  principally  of  silica  (mass  fraction 
>99 %). 
 
Storage:  SRM 2206 should be stored in the original bottle with screw cap tightly sealed.  Bottles can be stored at 
normal laboratory ambient temperature and humidity.  In order to avoid possible contamination, material removed 
for  testing  should  not  be  returned  to  the  original  bottle  but  can  be  reused  indefinitely  if  stored  separately  under 
similar conditions in a clean sealed bottle or measurement tube; non-compliance with the certified values indicates 
that a reused sample should be replaced with a new sample taken from the original bottle. 
 
Sampling Procedure:  Before removing a sample for testing, the bottle containing SRM 2206 (with screw cap in 
place) should be gently and alternately rotated and inverted several times to ensure mixing.  Using a clean stainless 
steel  spatula  or  similar  device,  remove  sufficient  material  for  analysis,  and  transfer  to  an  appropriate-size 
pre-weighed glass sample tube; the mass to be analyzed should be between 0.5 g and 0.9 g.  A funnel can be utilized 
to deliver powder more efficiently to the bottom of the sample tube.  Gentle tapping is applied to the funnel and/or 
sample tube in order to ensure that the powder is delivered to the bulb area at the bottom.  If powder persists on the 
inner surface of the tube stem (above the bulb), a pipe cleaner can be used to remove this material.  
 
Gravimetric  Procedure:    Sample  mass  for  gas  sorption  analysis  should  be  measured  using  a  properly  calibrated 
analytical balance that reads to  0.1 mg or better.  The mass of the dry empty tube plus fill rod (if used) and sealing 
device (e.g., stopper or seal frit) should then be recorded (mass = M1).  The fill rod and sealing device should then 
be removed and the balance tared with the empty tube to facilitate sample transfer.  After transferring an appropriate 
mass of sample (see above), the mass of the tube + sample + fill rod + sealer should be recorded (mass = M2).  After 
weighing  operations  are  complete,  the  instrument  manufacturer’s  instructions  or  accepted  practice  should  be 
followed to seal and install the sample tube for outgassing (see below).  Once outgassing is complete and the sample 
is  cooled  to  room  temperature,  measure  and  record  the  mass  of  the  tube + outgassed  sample + fill  rod  (if 
used) + sealing device (mass = M3).  Subtract M1 from M3 to obtain the mass of the outgassed sample to  0.1 mg; 
use this value for calculation of BET SSA.  Subtract mass M3 from mass M2 to obtain the mass loss resulting from 
outgassing  (moisture  removal);  the  mass  loss  is  typically  1.5 %  to  4 %,  but  can  exceed  this  range  depending  on 
ambient humidity and storage conditions. 
 
Outgassing Procedure:  The sample should be outgassed under vacuum.  Heat the sample to 110 °C at a rate not to 
exceed  10 °C per minute.    If  automated  evacuation  control  is  available,  the  sample  tube  should  be  evacuated  at  a 
maximum  rate  of  0.667 kPa/s  (5 Torr  per  second);  if  the  rate  exceeds  this  value  then  the  heating  ramp  should  be 
suspended  until  the  pressure  drops  into  the  safe  range.    This  procedure  prevents  sample  powder  uptake  into  the 
evacuation system.  Once the pressure drops below 0.667 kPa (5 Torr), unrestricted evacuation should proceed.  In 
the  absence  of  automated  evacuation  control,  a  slower  temperature  ramp  (e.g.,  1 °C per minute)  is  recommended. 
Hold  sample  temperature  at  the  first  set  point  (110 °C)  for  approximately  10 minutes.    Then  raise  the  sample 
temperature to 300 °C at a rate not to exceed 10 °C per minute and hold at the maximum set point temperature for at 
least 2 hours and no more than 6 hours.  After completion of outgassing, turn off heat, backfill with nitrogen gas, 
and allow the sample to cool to room temperature.  If helium is used for backfill instead of nitrogen, a gravimetric 
error of order 3 % to 5 % can be expected due to the density difference between helium and air; this error can be 
reduced by using a fill rod or increasing the sample volume (i.e., reducing the dead space), but it is preferable to 
backfill with nitrogen. 
 
Analysis Procedure:  Sample analysis should be initiated as soon as possible following completion of outgassing 
and weighing  operations.  Follow  the  instrument  manufacturer's  recommendations or  accepted  practice  to  measure 
BET SSA using nitrogen gas as the adsorptive at liquid nitrogen temperature.  The certified values were determined 

 

Page 2 of 3 

SRM 2206 
 

using  a  discontinuous  manometric  technique  as  described  in  ISO 9277 [5];  use  of  other  measurement  techniques 
may result in values that deviate beyond the certified uncertainty range.  The following parameters should be used 
for  measurements.    For  multi-point  analysis,  choose  at  least  four  measurement  points  (preferably  more)  evenly 
distributed  over  the  relative  pressure (p/p0)  range  from 0.05  to 0.3  (where  p  and  p0  are  the  equilibrium  and  the 
saturation pressure of the adsorptive, respectively).  The intercept for the linear BET plot must be positive and the 
correlation coefficient (r2) for  linear regression  must  be  at least 0.999.    For single-point  analysis, use a  p/p0  value 
close  to  but  not  exceeding 0.3.    A  value  of  0.162 nm2  must  be  used  for  the  molecular  cross-sectional  area  of 
adsorbed  nitrogen  gas.    The  purity  of  helium  gas  used  to  calibrate  measurement  volumes  (e.g.,  free  space 
determination) should be at least 99.999 %.  The purity of the adsorptive nitrogen gas should be at least 99.99 %.  
The liquid nitrogen level should be maintained at least 50 mm above the sample and constant to within 1 mm.  The 
analysis procedure should include a leak test. 
 
For informational purposes, a representative multipoint BET plot is shown in Figure 1. 
 

  

)

P
T
S
3

 

m
c
/
g
(
 
]

1

 
-
 
p

/

0
p

[

a
n

/

1

0.14

0.12

0.10

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0.00

r2 = 0.99943

     

isotherm data
regression

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

0.30

0.35

Figure 1.  Representative nitrogen sorption isotherm for SRM 2206 plotted in the linear form of the BET equation.  
The specific amount of gas adsorbed (na) is reported at standard temperature and pressure (STP). 
 

p/p0

 

 
REFERENCES 

 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment 
of  Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136  (2000);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/srm/publications.cfm (accessed April 2012). 

[2]  Searle, S.R.;  Casella, G.;  McCulloch, C.E.;  Variance  Components;  John  Wiley  &  Sons,  Inc.:  New York 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

(1992). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data - Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(ISO  GUM  1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  April 2012);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
http://physics.nist.gov/Pubs/ (accessed April 2012). 
JCGM 101:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data – Supplement 1 to the Guide to Expression of Uncertainty 
in Measurement; Propagation of Distributions Using a Monte Carlo Method; Joint Committee for Guides in 
Metrology  (2008);  available  at  http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_101_2008_E.pdf 
(accessed April 2012). 
ISO 9277:2010;  Determination  of  the  Specific  Surface  Area  of  Solids  by  Gas  Adsorption  —  BET  Method; 
International Organization for Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland (2010). 

 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting 
fax  (301) 948-3730; 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

telephone  (301) 975-2200; 

the  SRM  Program  at: 

 

SRM 2206 
 

 

Page 3 of 3 

