oe 
&/ 

 
"
a

 
a

Stary oF 

National  institute  of  Standards  &  Uerhnology 

Certiftcale  of  Analysis 

Standard  Reference  Material  2289 

t-Amyl-methyl  Ether  in  Reference  Gasoline 
(Nominal  2.7  Weight  Percent  Oxygen) 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  as  a  primary  standard  for  the  calibration  of 
instruments  used  for  the  determination  of  the  oxygen  content  of  motor  fuels. 
It  consists  of  a  solution  of  t-amyl-methyl 
ether  (Chemical  Abstracts  Service  (CAS)  Registry  Number  994-05-8)  in  a  reference  gasoline.  Certified  concentrations 
are  provided  for  t-amyl-methyl  ether  and  oxygen.  A  unit  of  SRM  2289  consists  of  two  20  mL  ampoules  of  the  t-amyl- 
methyl  ether  in  reference  gasoline  solution,  each  containing  approximately  18  mL,  and  one  20  mL  ampoule  containing 
approximately  18  mL  of  the  reference  gasoline,  intended  for  use  as 

a  measurement  blank. 

Certified  Concentrations:  The  certified  concentrations  and  estimated  uncertainties  for  t-amyl-methyl  ether  and  oxygen 
are  given  below.  These  concentrations  are  based  on  results  obtained  from  the  gravimetric  preparation  of  the  solution  of 
t-amyl-methy!  ether in  gasoline  and  from  the  analytical  results  determined  using  gas  chromatography,  corrected  for 
impurities. 

Component 

t-Amyl-methyl  Ether 
Oxygen 

Wt  % 
(2/100  g  Solution) 

17.30  +  0.20 
0.04 
2.73  + 

Uncertainty:  The  uncertainty  of  each  value  on  this  document  is  the  numerical  value  of  an  expanded  uncertainty  U=  ku, 
with  U  determined  from  a  combined  standard  uncertainty  u,  and  a  coverage  factor, 
k  =  2.  The  expanded  uncertainty 
defines  a  range  of  values  for  the  certified  value  within  which  the  true  value  is  believed  to  lie,  at  a  level  of  confidence  of 
95%  [1]. 

NOTICE  AND  WARNING  TO  USERS 

Handling  and  Storage:  Provide  local  exhaust  or  general  dilution  ventilation  to  meet  published  exposure  limits.  Those 
handling  gasoline  should  wear  appropriate  clothing  and  gloves  to  prevent  skin  contact  with  this  material  and  splash-proof 
Store  in  a  cool,  dry,  and  well-ventilated  area  away  from 
or  dust  resistant  safety  goggles  to  prevent  eye  contact. 
incompatible  materials  and  prevent  contact  with  heat  sparks  or  open  flame. 
Protect  ampoules  from  physical  damage. 
Please  read  the  MSDS  for  this  material  before  use. 

Analytical  determinations  were  performed  by  $.N.  Chesler  and  T.L.  Green  of  the  NIST  Analytical  Chemistry  Division.  The 
coordination  of the  technical  measurements  leading  to  certification  was  under  the  direction  of  S.N.  Chesler  and  F.R.  Guenther 
of  the  NIST  Analytical  Chemistry  Division.  Data  analysis  was  provided  by  D.  Duewer  of  the  NIST  Analytical  Chemistry 
Division  and  reviewed  by  K.  Eberhart  of  the  NIST  Statistical  Engineering  Division. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated 
through  the  Standard  Reference  Materials  Program  by  T.E.  Gills  and  J.S.  Kane. 

Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 
January  25,  1995 

Thomas  E.  Gills,  Chief 
Standard  Reference  Materials  Program 

(over)

Expiration  of  Certification:  The  certified  values  are  valid,  within  the  limits  specified,  for  5  years  from  the  date  of 
shipment  from  NIST.  In  the  event  that  the  certification  should  become  invalid  before  then,  purchasers  will  be  notified 
by  NIST.  Please  return  the  attached  registration  card  to  facilitate  notification. 

Use:  Sample  aliquots  for  analysis  should  be  withdrawn  at  20  to  25  °C  immediately  after  opening  the  ampoules  and  should 
be  processed  without  delay  for  the  certified  values  to  be  valid  within  the  stated  uncertainty.  Because  of  the  volatility  of 
some  of  the  components  in  the  reference  gasoline,  certified  values  are  not  applicable  to  material  stored  in  ampoules  that 
have  been  opened  for  more  than  5  min,  even  if  they  are  resealed. 

Preparation  and  Gravimetric  Analysis:  This  SRM  was  prepared  by  G.  Lew  of  Scott  Specialty  Gases  Inc.  at  Scott’s 
facilities  in  Houston,  TX.  All  chemicals  used  in  the  preparation  of  this  material  were  obtained  from  commercial  sources. 
The  reference  gasoline  was  obtained  from  Phillips  Petroleum,  Bartlesville,  OK  and  was  identified  as  RF-A.  HPLC  Grade 
t-amyl-methyl  ether  was  obtained  from  Aldrich  Chemical  Co.,  Milwaukee,  WI. 

This  SRM  was  prepared  by  additive  weighing  of  the  RF-A  gasoline  and  t-amyl-methyl  ether. 
After  preparation  and 
homogenization,  the  solution  was  aliquoted  into  20  mL  giass  ampoules  which  were  subsequently  flame  sealed.  The 
gravimetrically  determined  concentration  of  t-amyl-methyl  ether  in  the  SRM  solution  was  (17.50  +  0.02)  2/100  g  solution. 

Gas  Chromatographic  Analysis: 
The  concentration  of  the  t-amyl-methyl  ether  in  the  SRM  solution  was  determined 
by  capillary  column  gas  chromatography  using  flame  ionization  detection  (GC-FID).  Analysis  was  based  upon  the  ratio 
of  the  elution  peak  area  of  t-amyl-methy!  ether  and  that  of  a  gasoline  component.  The  gasoline  component  selected  had 
t-Amyl-methyl  ether  solution 
a  large,  well-resolved  peak  with  a  similar  retention  time  to  t-amyl-methyl  ether. 
concentration  was  calculated  from  a  calibration  curve  constructed  from  peak  area  ratios  for  unmodified  RF-A  gasoline 
blank  and  NIST  gravimetrically  prepared  standards.  This  concentration  of  t-amyl-methyl  ether  in  the  SRM  solution  was 
(17.55  +  0.12)  g/100  g  solution. 

The  organic  purity  of  the  t-amyl-methyl  ether  was  also  determined  using  GC-FID.  Based  on  12  replicate  analyses,  it  was 
determined  to  be  (98.79  +  0.04)%. 

The  water  concentration  of the  SRM  solution  was  determined  by  capillary  column  gas  chromatography  using  atomic  emission 
detection  (GC-AED)  in  oxygen-specific  mode.  Based  on 3  replicate  analyses,  it  was  determined  to  be  (0.02  +  0.01)  g/100¢ 
SRM  solution.  The  concentration  of  oxygen  from  trace  organic  impurities  was  also  determined  using  GC-AED.  No 
significant  oxygen-containing  impurities  other  than  water  were  found  in  this  SRM. 

The  t-amyl-methyl  ether  content  in  the  SRM  solution  was  calculated  from  the  consensus  concentration  of  t-amy!-methyl 
ether  in  the  SRM  solution,  with  corrections  for  both  water  and  organic  purity.  The  molecular  oxygen  content  in  the  SRM 
was  calculated  from  the  sum  of  the  corrected  t-amyl-methy]  ether  concentration  and  water  concentration. 

REFERENCE 

[1] 

"Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in  Measurement",  ISBN  92-67-10188-9  Ist  Ed.  ISO,  Geneva,  Switzerland, 
(1993).

