   

s/  Mational  Institute  of  Stantaries  &  Technology 

Certificate  of  Analysts 
Standard  Reference  Material  2290 

Ethyl-t-butyl  Ether  in  Reference  Gasoline 
(Nommal  2.0  Weight  Percent  Oxygen) 

This  Standard  Reference  Maternal  (SRM)  is  intended  primanty  for  use  as  a  primary  standard  for  the  caltbration  of 
It  consists  of  a  solution  of  ethyl-t 
instruments  used  for  the  determination  of  the  oxygen  content  of  motor  fuels. 
butyl  ether  (Chemical  Abstracts  Service  (CAS)  Registry  Number  6357-92-73)  in  a  reference  gasoline. 
Certified 
concentrations  are  provided  for  ethylt-butyl  ether  and  oxygen.  A  unit  of  SRM  2290  consists  of  tro  20  mL 
ampowes  of  the  ethyl-t-butyl  ether  in  reference  gasoline  solution,  each  contaming  approximately  14  mL,  and  one 
20  mL  ampoule  containing  approximately  18  mL  of  the  reference  gasoline,  intended  for  use  as 
a  measurement 
blank. 

Certified  Concentrations:  The  certified  concentrmtions  ancl  estimated  uncertainties  for  ethylt-butyl  ether  and 
oxygen  are  grren  below.  These  concentrations  are  based  on  results  obtained  from  the  gravimetric  preparation  of 
the  solution  of  etkayl-t-tutyl  ether  in  gasoline  and  from  the  anebytical  results  determined  using  gas  chromatography, 
corrected  for  impurities. 

Componert 

Etteyl-t-butyl  Ether 
Oxygen 

Wt Fa 
(Z100  g  Solution) 

12.78  +  0.28 
2.01  40.04 

Uncertainty:  The  uncertainty  of  each  value  on  this  document  is  the  numerical  value  of  an  expanded  uncertainty  U= 
hu,  With  U  determined  from  a  combined  standart!  uncertainty  u,  ancl  a  covempge  factor, 
The  expanded 
uiicertainty  defines  arenge  of  values  for  the  certified  value  within  which  the  true  value  is  believed  to  lie,  at  a  level 
of  confidence  of  95%% 

[1]. 

2. 

k= 

NOTICE  AND  WARNING  TO  USERS 

Handling  and  Storage:  Provide  local  exhaust  or  general  dilution  ventilation  to  meet  published  exposure  limits. 
Those  handling  gasoline  should  weer  appropnate  clothing  and  gloves  to  prevent  skin  contact  with  this  maternal  and 
splash-proof  or  dust  resistant  safety  gogeles  to  prevent  eye  contact.  Store  ina  cool  dry,  and  well-ventiated  area 
away  from  incompatible  materials  and  prevent  contact  with  heat  sparks  or  open  flame. 
Protect  ampoules  from 
physical  damage.  Please  read  the MSDS  for  this  material  hefore  use. 

  

Analytical  determinations  were  performed  by  5.N.  Chesler  and  TL.  Green  of  the  NIST  Anabrtical  Chenustry 
Division.  The  coortination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  certification  was  under  the  direction  of  5. 
Chesler  end  F.R.  Guenther  of  the  NIST  Anabytical  Chemistry  Division.  Data  analysis  was  provided  by  D.  Duewer 
of  the  NIST  Analytical  Chenustry  Drvision  and  reviewed  by  K.  Eberhart  of  the  NIST  Statistical  Engineenng 
Divigion. 

The  technical  end  support  aspects  imrolved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  SRM  were 
coordinated  through  the  Standard  Reference  Materials  Program by  TE.  Gills  and  JS.  Kane. 

Gaithersburg,  MID  20899 
January  25,  1995 

Thomas  E.  Gills,  Chief 
standard  Reference  Materials  Program 

(over)

Expiration  of  Certification:  The  certifiedvahies  are  valid,  within  the  limits  specified,  for  5  years  from  the  date 
of  shipment  from  NIST.  In  the  event  that  the  certification  should  become  invalid  before  then,  purchasers  will  be 
notified  by  NIST  Please  retum  the  attached  registration  card  to  facilitate  notification. 

Use:  Sample  aliquots  for  analysis  should be  withdrawn  at  20  to  25  °C  immediately  after  opening  the  ampoules  and 
should  be  processed  without  delay  for  the  certified  values  to  be  valic  within  the  stated  uncertainty.  Because  of  the 
volatility  of  some  of  the  components  in  the  refererice  gasoline,  certified  values  are  not  applicable  to  material 
stored  in  ampoules  that  have  been  opened  for  more  than  5  min,  even  if  they  are  resealed. 

This  SEM  was  prepared  by  G.  Lew  of  Scott  Specialty  Gases  Inc.  at 
Preparation  and  Gravimetric  Analysts, 
scott's  Facilities  in  Houston,  TX. 
All  chemicals  used  in  the  preparation  of  this  matenal  were  obtained  from 
commercial  sources.  The  reference  gasoline  was  obtained  from  Phillips  Petroleum,  Bartlesville,  OF  and  wes 
identified  as  RF-A.  HPLC  Grade  ethyl-tbutyl  ether  was  obtained  from  Aldtich  Chemical  Co.,  Milveukee,  WT. 

This  SRM  was  prepared  by  additive  weighing  of  the  RF-A  gasoline  and  ethyl-t-butyl  ether.  After  preparation  and 
homogenization,  the  solution  was  aliquoted  into  20  mL  glass  ampoules  which  were  subsequently  flame  sealed.  The 
gravimetrically  determined  concentration  of  ethyl-t-butyl  ether  in  the  SRM  sobation wes  (13.03 
0.02%  2/100  ¢g 
solution. 

Gas  Chromatographic  Anakysis:  The  concentration  of  the  ethyl-t-butyl  ether  in  the  SRM  solution  was  determined 
by  capillary  column  gas  chromatography 
using  flame  ionization  detection  (GC-FID).  Anahysis  was  based  upon  the 
ratio  of  the  elution  peak  area  of  ethyyl-t-butyl  ether  and  that  of  a  gasoline  component.  The  gasoline  componert 
selected had  a  large,  well-resolved  peak  with  «  similar  retention  time  to  ethyl-t-butyl  ether.  Ethyl-t-butyl  ether 
solution  concentration  was  calculated  from  a  calibration  curve  constructed  from  peak  area  ratios  for  unmodified 
RF.A  gasoline  blank  and  NIET  gravimetrically  prepared  standards.  This  concentration  of  ethyl-t-butyl  ether  in  the 
ARM  solution  was  (13.144£0.12)  gf100  ¢  solution. 

The  orgaruc  purity  of  the  ethyl-t-butyl  ether  was  also  determined  using GC-FID  Bagedon  12  replicate  analyses,  it 
was  determinedto  be  OF. 72  +0.12)%. 

The  water  concentration  of  the  SRM  solution  wes  determined  ty  capillany  column  ges  chromatogimphy  using 
atomic  emission  detection  (GC-AED)  in  oxygen-specific  mode  Based  on  3  replicate  analyses,  it  was  determined 
to  be  0.01  +  0.015  g/100  g  SRM  solution.  The  concentration  of  oxygen  from  trace  organic  impurities  was  also 
determined  using  GC-AED.  No  significant  oxygen-contaming  impunties  other  than  water  were  found  in  this  SRM 

The  ethyl-t-utyl  ether  content  in  the  SRM  solution  was  calculated  from  the  consenms  concentration  of  ethyl-t 
butyl  ether  in  the  SRM  solution,  with  corrections  for  both  water  and  orgenic  purity.  The  molecular  oxygen  contert 
in  the  SRM  was 
ether  concentration  end  water 
concentration. 

calculated  from  the  sum  of  the 

corrected  ethyl-t-tutyl 

"Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertamty  in  Measurement’,  ISBN  92-67-10128-9  let  Ed.  ISO,  Geneva, 

[1] 
Switzerland, 

(1993).

REFERENCE 

