National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 2379 

 

 
Drugs of Abuse in Human Hair I 
 
This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  validating  methods  for  determining 
cocaine (COC), benzoylecgonine (BZE), cocaethylene (CE), amphetamine (AMP), methamphetamine (MAMP), and 
phencyclidine (PCP) in human hair and similar materials.  This SRM can also be used for quality assurance when 
assigning values to in-house control materials.  The SRM is a drug-free human hair material to which drugs of abuse 
have been added.  A unit of SRM 2379 consists of one bottle containing approximately 100 mg of hair segments. 
 
Certified  Mass  Fraction  Values:    The  certified  mass  fraction  values  for  the  target  compounds  in  SRM 2379  are 
provided in Table 1.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy in 
that  all  known  or  suspected  sources  of  bias  have  been  investigated  or  taken  into  account [1].    The  certified 
concentration  values  for  each  level  are  based  on  the  agreement  of  results  from  gas  chromatography  –  mass 
spectrometry (GC-MS)  and  liquid  chromatography  –  mass  spectrometry (LC-MS).    Values  are  reported  on  an  as-
received basis in mass fraction units. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2379 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until  01  January  2017,  provided  the  SRM  is handled and stored in accordance with the instructions given in this 
certificate (see “Instructions for Storage and Use”).  However, the certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance  of  SRM  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If 
substantive  technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will 
notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
The overall direction and coordination of the analytical measurements leading to the certification of this SRM were 
performed by M.J. Welch and K.W. Phinney of the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division. 
 
Certification  measurements  were  performed  by  J.L. Prendergast,  L.T. Sniegoski,  and  S.S-C. Tai  of  the  NIST 
Analytical Chemistry Division.  Additional measurements were performed by M.M. Schantz of the NIST Analytical 
Chemistry Division and B.E. Lang of the NIST Biochemical Science Division. 
 
Statistical consultation was provided by N.-f. Zhang of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Measurement  Services 
Division. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  24 September 2012 
Revision History on Last Page 

Robert L. Watters., Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

Stephen A. Wise, Chief 
Analytical Chemistry Division 

SRM 2379  

Page 1 of 3 

NOTICE AND WARNING TO USERS 
 
Warning:  For laboratory use only. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage:  The SRM should be stored under refrigeration at temperatures between 4 C and 8 C. 
 
Use:    A  quantity  of  hair  appropriate  for  a  particular  analysis  should  be  withdrawn  and  weighed  on  an  analytical 
balance prior to extraction and analysis. 
 
SOURCE, PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS1 
 
Preparation:  SRM 2379 is human hair from a single individual.  The hair was manually cut into short segments 
and  then  soaked  for  19 days  in  a  0.01 mol/L  solution  of  HCl  in  equal  volumes  of  water:dimethylsulfoxide 
containing the target analytes.  The hair was removed from the mother liquor, rinsed several times with methanol, 
and allowed to air dry. 
 
NIST  Analyses  for  the  Target  Drugs  of  Abuse:    For  each  of  the  analytes,  measurements  from  two  independent 
methods  based  on  GC-MS  and  LC-MS  were  used.    One  GC-MS  method  was  used  for  measurement  of  AMP  and 
MAMP; another GC-MS method was used for the other four compounds.  For the GC-MS methods [2], hair samples 
were spiked with deuterated analogs of each of the analytes and then extracted with 0.1 mol/L HCl at 45 ºC for 24 h. 
The extracts were neutralized and put through commercial solid-phase extraction cartridges designed for urine drug 
testing following the manufacturer’s directions.  After the eluants were collected and dried, COC, BZE, CE, and 
PCP  were  dissolved  in  N,O-bis (trimethylsilyl)acetamide  and  analyzed  together.    AMP  and  MAMP  were 
derivatized with heptafluorobutyric acid anhydride and analyzed together.  The GC-MS was equipped with a 30 m 
low-polarity GC column, and measurements were performed using electron ionization and selected ion monitoring.  
For  the  LC-MS  method,  all  six  compounds  were  measured  together  in  a  single  LC-MS  run.    Hair  samples  were 
spiked  with  deuterated  analogs  of  each  of  the  analytes  and  extracted  with  0.1 mol/L  HCl  at  45 ºC  for  24 h.    The 
extracts were neutralized and put through solid-phase extraction cartridges that were different from those used for 
the GC-MS method.  No derivatization was necessary for the LC-MS measurements.  The LC was equipped with a 
deactivated C18 column, and compounds were eluted using a gradient mobile phase of 0.1 % (volume fraction) acetic 
acid  in  water  and  methanol.    The  electrospray  ionization  conditions  were  optimized  for  each  analyte.    For  both 
GC-MS and LC-MS methods, three sets of samples were measured for all of the analytes.  Each set consisted of two 
samples each from three bottles of SRM 2379.  Calibration standards were run before and after the samples, and a 
standard curve was generated by a least-squares fit of all of the standards measurements for a particular set. 
 
Homogeneity Assessment:  For the sample sizes used for the certification measurements (20 mg to 25 mg), there 
was  no  evidence  of  within-bottle  inhomogeneity.    There  also  was  no  correlation  between  fill  order  and 
concentrations measured for any of the analytes. 
 
Stability Measurements:  Analyses of the target analytes were performed using the GC-MS and LC-MS approaches 
previously described.  The certified concentration values for amphetamine and cocaine were updated based upon the 
stability measurements. 

                                                            

1Certain commercial materials and equipment are identified to specify adequately the experimental procedure.  Such identification 
does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or 
equipment identified are the best available for the purpose. 

SRM 2379  

Page 2 of 3 

Certified Mass Fraction Values:  The uncertainty provided with each value is an expanded uncertainty about the 
mean  to  cover  the  measurand  with  approximately  95 %  confidence,  consistent  with  the  ISO  Guide  and  its 
Supplement 1 [3–7].  The expanded uncertainty is calculated as U = kuc, where uc is the combined uncertainty and k 
is a coverage factor corresponding to approximately 95 % confidence for each analyte [3].  For the certified values 
shown below, k = 2. 
 
 

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fraction Values for Analytes in SRM 2379 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

Analyte 
 

Mass Fraction  
(ng/mg) 

5.49 
4.01 
2.67 
6.84 
5.20 
6.24 

  0.28 
  0.31 
  0.24 
  0.54 
  0.27 
  0.42 

 

Amphetamine 
Benzoylecgonine 
Cocaethylene 
Cocaine 
Methamphetamine 
Phencyclidine 

 
REFERENCES 

 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G..;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment 
of  Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136,  U.S.  Government 
Printing Office, Washington, DC (2000); available at 
http://www.cstl.nist.gov/nist839/NIST_special_publications.htm (accessed Sep 2012). 

[3] 

[2]  Welch, M.J.;  Sniegoski, L.T.;  Allgood, C.C.;  Habram, M.;  Hair  Analysis  for  Drugs  of  Abuse:  Evaluation  of 
Analytical  Methods,  Environmental  Issues,  and  Development  of  Reference  Materials;  J.  Anal.  Toxicol., 
Vol. 17, pp. 389–398 (1993). 
JCGM 100:2008;  Evaluation  of  Measurement  Data  —  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in 
Measurement  (ISO  GUM  1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology  (2008); 
available at http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf 
(accessed Sep 2012);  see  also  Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the 
Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement  Results;  NIST  Technical  Note  1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office: 
Washington, DC (1994); available at http://physics.nist.gov/Pubs/ (accessed Sep 2012). 
JCGM 101:2008;  Evaluation  of  measurement  data  –  Supplement  1  to  the  Guide  to  the  Expression  of 
Uncertainty in Measurement – Propagation of Distributions Using a Monte Carlo Method; Joint Committee 
for Guides in Metrology (JCGM) (2008); available at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_101_2008_E.pdf (accessed Sep 2012). 

[4] 

[5]  Rukhin, A.L.; Weighted Means Statistics in Interlaboratory Studies; Metrologia, Vol. 46, pp. 323–331 (2009). 
Schiller, S.B.; Eberhardt, K.E.; Combining Data from Independent Chemical Analysis Methods; Spectrochim. 
[6] 
Acta, 46B, No. 12, pp.  1607–1613 (1991). 
Levenson, M.S.; Banks, D.L.; Eberhardt, K.R.; Gill, L.M.; Guthrie, W.F.; Liu, H-k.; Vangel, M.G.; Yen, J.H.; 
Ahang, N.F.; An Approach to Combining Results from Multiple Methods Motivated by the ISO GUM; J. Res. 
Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., Vol. 105, pp. 571–579 (2000). 

[7] 

 
 
 
 
Certificate Revision History:  24 September 2012 (Revised certified mass fraction values for cocaine and amphetamine, editorial changes, and 
an extension of the certification period); 08 November 2002 (Original certificate issue date).  
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by 
fax (301) 948-3730; 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

contacting 

telephone 

 

SRM 2379  

Page 3 of 3 

