NUT 

Date of Issue: 
02 February 2018 
 

Standard Reference Material 2385 
Slurried Spinach 
CERTIFICATE OF ANALYSIS 

 

Purpose:    This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  for  use  in  validating  methods  for  determining 
elements,  vitamins,  proximates,  and  calories  in  spinach  and  similar  matrices,  and  for  qualifying  in-house  control 
materials analyzed using those methods. 
 
Description:  A unit of SRM 2385 consists of four jars, each containing approximately 7 g of slurried spinach. 
 
Certified Values:  Certified values are provided in Table 1.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has 
the highest confidence in that all known or suspected sources of bias have been evaluated [1,2]. 
 
 

ning  approximately  7 

evaluated 

Table 1.  Certified Values for Elements in SRM 2385 
Values are metrologically traceable to the International System of Units (SI) derived unit for mass 
fraction expressed as milligrams per kilogram. 

for  Elements  in  SRM 
national  System  of  Unit: 

 

 

  

 

Calcium (Ca) 
Iron (Fe) 
Magnesium (Mg) 
Manganese (Mn) 
Phosphorus (P) 
Potassium (K) 
Zinc (Zn) 

Mass Fraction(a,b) 
(mg/kg) 

624 
± 
17.1  ± 
± 
368 
3.81  ± 
323.7  ± 

 
 
 
 
 
  3650 
 

8.37  ± 

40 
1.9 
30 
0.10 
6.6 

0.37 

±  250 

(a)  Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the certified value and U95%(x) is the expanded uncertainty 
of the certified value.  The true value of the analyte is believed to lie within the interval x ± U95%(x) with 
95 % confidence.  To propagate this uncertainty, treat the certified value as a normally distributed random 
ibuted  random 
variable with mean x and standard deviation U95%(x)/2.  Values are based on a minimum required sample 
mass of 7 g. 

(b)  Determined at NIST as described in Appendix E. 

 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2385 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until  30 June 2027,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this 
certificate.  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 
Certificate Revision History on Page 4 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

‘ed,  or  other

 

Page 1 of 8 

 

 
 

Non-Certified Values:  Tables 2 and 3 list values that do not meet the NIST criteria for certification.  Non-certified 
values were formerly known as Reference and Information values. 
 
 

criteria  for  certification 

Table 2.  Estimated Mass Fraction Values for Constituents in SRM 2385(a) 
calibration  procedures  and 
Values are metrologically traceable to the measurement methods and the calibration procedures and 
standards used. 
 

  

 

Copper (Cu)(c) 
Sodium (Na)(c) 
) 
trans-β-Carotene(d) 
 
 

Solids(e) 

Mass Fraction(b) 
(mg/kg) 

0.90  ±  0.16 
47 
15.1  ± 

±  1 

 3.1 

(g/100 g) 

5.28  ±  0.10 

 
 
 
 

 

 

(a)  Values are based in whole or in part on measurements made at NIST.  Additional results were provided by 

the collaborating laboratories listed in Appendices C and D. 

(b)  Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the estimated value and U95%(x) is the expanded uncertainty 
of the value.  As measured by the specific method(s), the true value of the analyte is believed to lie within 
ved  to  lie  within
the interval x ± U95%(x) with about a 95 % confidence.  To propagate this uncertainty, treat the value as a 
normally distributed random variable with mean x and standard deviation U95%(x)/2. 

(c)  Values are based on a minimum required sample mass of 7 g. 
(d)  Values are based on a minimum required sample mass of 1.5 g. 
(e)  No  minimum  required  sample  mass  is  provided  since  mass  used  is  dependent  on  individual  drying 

protocols. 

 

SRM 2385 

 

Page 2 of 8 

 

Table 3.  Consensus Values for Constituents in SRM 2385(a) 
this 
Values  are  metrologically  traceable  to  calibration  procedures  and  standards  used  within  this 
experienced measurement community. 

 

  

 

 

Niacin (Vitamin B3) 
 
 

Ash 
Fat (as sum of fatty acids as triglycerides) 
Protein 
Carbohydrates 
Total Dietary Fiber 
 

Calories, reported calculations(d) 
Calories, estimated from proximates(e) 

 

  

v(b) 

7 
 
v(b) 
12 
7 
10 
10 
5 
 
v(b) 
8 
25 

Mass Fraction(c) 
(mg/kg) 

2.99  ±  0.43 
 
(g/100 g) 

0.97  ±  0.05 
0.20  ±  0.06 
1.42  ±  0.13 
2.73  ±  0.18 
1.55  ±  0.28 

(kcal/100 g) 

18.16  ±  0.50 
18.40  ±  0.80 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

(a)  Values are based on results provided by the collaborating laboratories listed in Appendices C and D. 
(b)  Number of effective degrees of freedom, typically one less than the number of independent measurements. 
(c)  Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x denotes the mean of participant mean results and U95%(x) is 
 
the expanded uncertainty associated with the mean, evaluated as (
is the 97.5th percentile of the Student’s t distribution with v degrees of freedom and MAD is the median 
𝑣𝑣
of the absolute differences between the participant means and their overall mean [3].  The true value of 
the  analyte  is  believed  to  lie  within the  interval  x ± U95%(x)  with  95 %  confidence.    To propagate  this 
 degrees of freedom with mean x and 
uncertainty, treat the value as a Student’s t random variable having 
standard deviation s = (

)(1.8582)(MAD/

) where 

2)/(

√𝑛𝑛

). 

𝑡𝑡0

𝑡𝑡0

)/

975

975

(

(

𝑣𝑣

.

,

.

,

)
(d)  As reported by individual laboratories. 
𝑣𝑣
(e)  Using consensus values in Table 3. 

𝑈𝑈95%

𝑡𝑡0

975

𝑥𝑥

,

.

�

𝑣𝑣 −

𝑣𝑣

𝑣𝑣

 
Storage and Handling:  The SRM should be stored in the original, unopened jars under refrigeration (4 °C) until 
required for use.  Prior to removal of a test portion for analysis, the contents of a jar of spinach should be  mixed 
thoroughly and homogenized (e.g., using a rotor/stator type blender) for 1 min prior to removal of a test portion. 
 
Use:  The minimum sample mass indicated in Tables 1 through 3 should be used to relate analytical determinations 
to the certified values in this Certificate of Analysis.  Results obtained in analyses should include their own estimates 
of uncertainty and can be compared to the listed values using procedures described in references 3 and 4.  NIST strives 
to maintain the SRM inventory supply, but NIST cannot guarantee the continued or continuous supply of any specific 
SRM.  Accordingly, NIST encourages the use of this SRM as a benchmark for the quality and accuracy of the user’s 
in-house reference materials and working standards.  As such, the SRM should be used to validate the more routinely 
used reference materials in a laboratory.  Comparisons between the SRM and in-house reference materials or working 
measurement standards should take place at intervals appropriate to the conservation of the SRM and the stability of 
relevant in-house materials.  For further guidance on how this approach can be implemented, see reference 3 or contact 
NIST by email at srms@nist.gov. 
 
th  use;  not  for  human  consumption.
Safety:  SRM 2385 is intended for research use; not for human consumption. 
 
Source: SRM 2385 was prepared from a spinach crop that was held under refrigeration following harvesting, then 
washed lightly in a wash reel with cold water and blanched at 93 °C.  The spinach was then pureed using a Bertocchi 
cold extractor 0.635-cm (0.250-inch) screen.  The puree was heated to 90.5 °C in a batch tank and the consistency was 
adjusted to 3 to 5 Bostwick units with water.  The puree was then passed through a Fitzmill 0.084-cm (0.033-inch) 
screen, filled into jars to contain approximately 70 g (2.5 oz) of slurried spinach each, and capped.  The spinach was 
processed in two retort loads.  The jars were retorted at 121 °C and 207 kPa for 35 min. 
 
 
 
 

SRM 2385 

 

Page 3 of 8 

 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  May, W.; Parris, R.; Beck, C.; Fassett, J.; Greenberg, R.; Guenther, F.; Kramer, G.; Wise, S.; Gills, T.; Colbert, J.; 
Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of Reference 
Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special Publication  260-136,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  
Washington, DC (2000); available at http://www.nist.gov/srm/publications.cfm (accessed Feb 2018). 

rial 
[2]  Thompson, A.;  Taylor, B.N.;  Guide  for  the  Use  of  the  International  System  of  Units (SI);  NIST  Special 
at 

Printing  Office:  Washington, DC 

Publication 811;  U.S.  Government 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/sp811/index.cfm (accessed Feb 2018). 

available 

(2008); 

[3]  Rukhin, A.L. Compatibility Verification of Certified Reference Materials and User Measurements.  Metrologia, 

Vol. 51, pp. 11–17 (2014). 

[4]  Sharpless, K.E.; Lippa, K.A.; Duewer, D.L.; Rukhin, A.L.; The ABCs of Using Standard Reference Materials in 
the  Analysis  of  Foods  and  Dietary  Supplements:  A  Practical  Guide;  NIST  Special  Publication 260-181;  U.S. 
Government 
at 
Washington, DC 
http://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-181.pdf (accessed Feb 2018).  

available 

Printing 

(2014); 

Office: 

[5]  Epler, K.S.; Ziegler, R.G.; Craft, N.E.; Liquid Chromatographic Method for the Determination of Carotenoids, 
Retinoids,  and  Tocopherols  in  Human  Serum and  in  Food;  J.  Chromatogr.  (Biomed.  Applications),  Vol. 619, 
pp. 37–48 (1993). 

[6]  Brown Thomas, J.;  Kline, M.C.;  Schiller, S.B.;  Ellerbe, P.M.;  Sniegoski, L.T.;  Duewer, D.L.;  Sharpless, K.E.; 
Certification  of  Fat-Soluble  Vitamins,  Carotenoids,  and  Cholesterol  in  Human  Serum:  Standard  Reference 
Material 968b; Fresenius’ J. Anal. Chem., Vol. 356, pp. 1–9 (1996). 

il.  Chem.,  Vol. 

[7]  Sander, L.C.;  K.E. Sharpless;  Craft, N.E.;  Wise, S.A.;  Development  of  Engineered  Stationary  Phases  for  the 

Separation of Carotenoid Isomers; Anal. Chem., Vol. 66, pp. 1667–1674 (1994). 

[8]  Sharpless, K.E.;  Brown  Thomas, J.;  Sander, L.C.;  Wise, S.A.;  Liquid  Chromatographic  Determination  of 
Carotenoids in Human Serum Using an Engineered C30 and a C18 Stationary Phase; J. Chromatogr., B Vol. 678, 
pp. 187–195 (1996). 

lutein,  total  B 
2 

 
 
 
 
 
  
Certificate Revision History:  02 February 2018 (Change of expiration date; removal of values for total lutein, total β-carotene, and vitamin B2 
based  on  NIST's  decision  to  no  longer  support  these  measurement  capabilities  in  this  matrix;  editorial  changes);  26 April 2012  (Change  of 
 
expiration date; editorial changes); 09 December 2003 (Original certificate date). 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certain commercial equipment, instruments or materials may be identified in this Certificate of Analysis to adequately 
specify  the  experimental  procedure.    Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the 
National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology,  nor  does  it  imply  that  the  materials  or  equipment  identified  are 
necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
 
NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  until  its  certification  expires.    If  substantive  technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the 
certified values before this certificate expires, NIST will notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or 
register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Users of this SRM should ensure that the Certificate of Analysis in their possession is current.  Contact the Office of 
Reference Materials 100 Bureau Drive, Stop 2300, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899-2300; telephone (301) 975-2200; fax 
(301) 948-3730; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 
 

heir  possession  is  current. 

 

> 

SRM 2385 

 

Page 4 of 8 

 

APPENDIX A  

  M.M. Phillips,  L.J. Wood,  and  K.E. Sharpless  of  NIST;  H.B. Chin  and  D.W. Howell  of 

Responsibilities for SRM 2385 
 
Coordination: 
GMA  (Dublin, CA, and Washington, DC). 
 
Analytical measurements:  J.M. Brown Thomas, B.J. Porter, K.E. Sharpless, and L.J. Wood of NIST; analysts at 
organizations participating in the GMA FIACSG interlaboratory comparison exercise (see Appendix C for the list of 
exercises  for 
participating  organizations);  analysts  at  organizations  participating  in  NIST  interlaboratory  comparison  exercises  for 
value assignment of vitamins and carotenoids (see Appendix D for the list of participating organizations). 
 
Statistical analysis:  J.H. Yen 

D.W. 

 
APPENDIX B 

are 

 
The following abbreviations are used in this Certificate of Analysis. 
 
BHNRC  
DCP-AES 
 
FAAS 
FAES 
 
FIACSG  
 
GC 
GMA 
 
ICP-OES 
 
LC 
 
NPLC 
 
RPLC 
 
USDA 

Beltsville Human Nutrition Research Center 
direct current plasma atomic emission spectrometry 
flame atomic absorption spectrometry 
flame atomic emission spectrometry 
Food Industry Analytical Chemists Share Group 
gas chromatography 
Grocery Manufacturers Association 
inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry 
liquid chromatography 
normal phase liquid chromatography 
reversed phase liquid chromatography 
United States Department of Agriculture 
 
 
APPENDIX C 

 
TACSG  interlaboratory
Analysts  at  the  following  laboratories  analyzed  SRM 2385  as  blind  samples  in  a  GMA  FIACSG  interlaboratory 
comparison exercise. 
 
Campbell Soup Company (Camden, NJ, USA) 
Centro de Investigación y Asistencia Técnica a la Industria (Provincia de Río Negro, Argentina) 
Covance, Inc. (Madison, WI, USA) 
Del Monte Foods (Walnut Creek, CA, USA) 
General Mills, Inc. (Golden Valley, MN, USA) 
Gerber Products Company (Fremont, MI, USA) 
Hormel Foods Corporation (Austin, MN, USA) 
Kraft Foods, Inc. (Glenview, IL, USA) 
Nabisco, Inc. (East Hanover, NJ, USA) 
National Food Laboratory (Dublin, CA, USA) 
Nestlé Food Corporation (Dublin, OH, USA) 
Novartis Nutrition Technical Center (St. Louis Park, MN, USA) 
TPC Labs/Pillsbury (St. Paul, MN, USA) 
USDA, Food Composition Laboratory (Beltsville, MD, USA) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

SRM 2385 

 

Page 5 of 8 

 

 

APPENDIX D 
 
Analysts  at  the  following  laboratories  analyzed  SRM 2385  as  blind  samples  in  three  separate  interlaboratory 
comparison exercises organized by NIST in which vitamins and carotenoids were measured. 
 
AgriQuality (Auckland, New Zealand) 
Anchor Products (Waitoa, New Zealand) 
Harvard School of Public Health (Boston, MA, USA) 
Inspectorate for Health Protection and Veterinary Public Health (Maastricht, The Netherlands) 
Institute of Nutrition, Directorate of Fisheries (Bergen, Norway) 
Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique (Saint-Genès Champanelle, France) 
Laboratoire Marcel Merieux (Lyon, France) 
Livsmedelsverket (Uppsala, Sweden) 
Metametrix Clinical Laboratory, Inc. (Norcross, GA, USA) 
Nestlé Research Center (Lausanne, Switzerland) 
New Zealand Dairy Research Institute (Palmerston North, New Zealand) 
Puerta de Hierro (Madrid, Spain) 
Roche Vitamins Ltd. (Basel, Switzerland) 
TNO Nutrition and Food Research (Zeist, The Netherlands) 
University of Illinois at Chicago (Chicago, IL, USA) 
University of Ulster (Coleraine, Ireland) 
USDA, BHNRC (Beltsville, MD, USA) 
USDA – Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University (Boston, MA, USA) 
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (College Park, MD, USA) 
 
 

APPENDIX E 

 
NIST Analytical Approach for Determination of Elements:  Mass fractions of calcium, copper, iron, magnesium, 
manganese, phosphorus, potassium, sodium, and zinc were measured at NIST using ICP-OES.  Two 7 g test portions 
were  taken  from  each  of  five  jars  of  spinach  and  digested  with  nitric  acid  using  a  microwave  sample  preparation 
system.  Quantification was based on the method of standard additions using calibration solutions prepared from the 
SRM 3100 series of single-element standard solutions. 
 
NIST Analytical Approaches for Determination of trans-β−Carotene:  The mass fraction of trans-β-carotene was 
measured at NIST by using two sample preparation approaches and two LC methods.  For each jar sampled, the entire 
jar of spinach was homogenized for 1 min using a rotor/stator-type tissue homogenizer.  One or two 1.5 g test portions 
were taken from homogenized jars.  In the first sample preparation approach, test portions were combined with calcium 
carbonate,  an  ethanolic  internal  standard  solution,  tetrahydrofuran (THF),  and  methanol,  and  the  mixture  was 
homogenized for 1 min.  This mixture was then vacuum-filtered and aqueous sodium chloride solution was added to 
the filtrate.  The analyte was extracted into a mixture of hexane and diethyl ether, and the organic phase was washed 
with water and then evaporated under nitrogen.  Dried extracts were reconstituted with 1 mL ethanol prior to analysis.  
In the second sample preparation approach, test portions were combined with ethanolic internal standard solution, 
THF, and methanol.  The mixture was homogenized for approximately 45 s, and saponified at 40 °C for 30 min using 
methanolic potassium hydroxide.  Glacial acetic acid was then added to neutralize any remaining potassium hydroxide, 
an aqueous sodium chloride solution was added, and the analyte was extracted into a mixture of hexane and diethyl 
ether.  The organic phase was washed with water and then evaporated under nitrogen.  The residue was redissolved in 
500 µL ethanol prior to analysis.  Measurements of all test portions were made using a C18 analytical column and a 
gradient consisting of acetonitrile, methanol, and ethyl acetate [5,6] and using a C30 analytical column and a gradient 
consisting of methanol, water, and methyl tert-butyl ether [7,8].  A programmable absorbance detector was used for 
measurement of the trans-β−carotene at 450 nm.  The purity of the trans-β−carotene calibrant material was determined 
at NIST using spectrophotometry at 452 nm (molar extinction coefficient of 2560 dL·g-1cm-1) in combination with 
LC-absorbance at 452 nm. 
 
Analyses by Collaborating Laboratories:  Data from four additional sources was used for value assignment of this 
material:    an  interlaboratory  comparison  exercise  organized  by  the  GMA’s  FIACSG  including  14 participating 
laboratories, and three separate interlaboratory comparison exercises organized by NIST in  which carotenoids and 
vitamins  were  measured  by  19 laboratories.    Not  every  laboratory  measured  every  analyte.    The  laboratories 
participating in the GMA FIACSG interlaboratory comparison exercise were asked to use AOAC methods or their 
equivalent, to make single measurements from each of two jars, and to report the analytical method that was used.  
The laboratories participating in interlaboratory comparison exercises organized by NIST were asked to use their usual 
methods to make single measurements of carotenoids and/or vitamins in each of two or three jars.  Data from these 
SRM 2385 
Page 6 of 8 

 

of  values

exercises were combined with NIST data for assignment of values (acronyms are defined in Appendix B and methods 
used are listed in Appendix F). 
 
Homogeneity  Assessment:    The  homogeneity  of  calcium,  copper,  iron,  magnesium,  manganese,  phosphorus, 
potassium, sodium, zinc, and trans-β−carotene was assessed at NIST using the methods and test portions described 
above.  Analysis of the  variance showed statistically  significant heterogeneity in some  cases, and a component of 
inhomogeneity has been added to the uncertainty for calcium, copper, magnesium, and potassium.  Homogeneity of 
constituents measured solely by collaborating laboratories was not assessed, although the data were treated as though 
these analytes were homogeneously distributed. 
 
Value Assignment:  The certified values in this SRM were derived from results of analyses performed by NIST and 
the 33 collaborating institutions listed in Appendices B and C [1].  For calculation of assigned values for analytes that 
were measured only by NIST, the mean of the mean values from NIST results was used.  The collaborating laboratories 
reported the individual results for each of their analyses for a given analyte.  The mean of each laboratory’s results 
was then determined.  For calculation of assigned values for analytes that were measured only by the GMA FIACSG 
laboratories, the mean of the laboratory means was used.  For analytes that were also measured by NIST, the mean of 
the individual sets of NIST data were averaged with the mean of the individual GMA FIACSG laboratory means. 
 

 

SRM 2385 

 

Page 7 of 8 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

APPENDIX F 
 

Methods Used for Analytical Determinations 
 

Analyte 

Method 

Elements 

DCP-AES, FAAS, ICP-OES 

Ca 

Cu 

Fe 

K 

Mg 

Mn 

Na 

P 

Zn 

DCP-AES, FAAS, ICP-OES 

DCP-AES, FAAS, ICP-OES 

DCP-AES, FAAS, FAES, ICP-OES 

DCP-AES, FAAS, ICP-OES 

DCP-AES, FAAS, ICP-OES 

ICP-OES 

Absorption Spectrophotometry, FAAS, ICP-OES 

DCP-AES, FAAS, ICP-OES 

Proximates 

Ash 

Mass loss after ignition in muffle furnace 

Calories 

Calculation, [9×Fat + 4×Protein + 4×Carbohydrates] 

Carbohydrates 

Calculation, [solids – (protein + fat (as the sum of fatty acids) + ash)] 

Fat 

Sum of fatty acids as triglycerides as determined by hydrolysis with GC. 

Moisture 

Freeze drying, forced air oven, and vacuum oven. 

Protein 

Nitrogen determination using thermal conductivity or pyrolysis with  
thermal conductivity, nitrogen determination using pyrolysis with GC or 
pyrolysis with  thermal conductivity and GC; and Kjeldhal nitrogen 
determination.  A factor of 6.25 was used to convert nitrogen to protein. 

Total dietary fiber 

Enzymatic hydrolysis followed by gravimetry. 

Vitamins 
 

Niacin 

Microbiological assay, extraction followed by RPLC absorbance, acid 
digestion followed by absorption detection. 

trans-β-carotene 

Extraction and/or saponification followed by RPLC absorbance or NPLC 
absorbance. 

 

 

 

SRM 2385 

 

Page 8 of 8 

