 

oe 

Srares  oe

  

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

g- 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 2399   

 

Fragile X Human DNA Triplet Repeat Standard  

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM ) is intended to provide quality control by serving as a positive control to 
clinical laboratories that test human samples for Fragile X and who need to determine the number of CGG 
trinucleotide repeats present in samples.  This SRM is composed of human deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) from 
fragile X cell lines or patient samples that have been am plified using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques.  
0 μL of a 
This SRM consists of a single box containing nine vials, designated A through I.  Each vial contains 2
frozen PCR product with a different number of CGG repeats suspended in a buffer (10 mM Tris-Cl pH 8.5).  
 
The American College of Medical Genetic s Guidelines requires a positive control for all genetic testing [1].  In 
addition to medical diagnoses, the ability to detect the correct number of triplet repeats will help in genetic 
counseling and genetic research in the area of triplet repeat s.  SRM 2399 will also help to ensure the accuracy and 
comparability of results from different laboratories.  
 
Certified Values:   Table 1 contains the certified values for the number of trinucleotide repeats in eight of the nine 
samples.  Table 2 summarizes the trip
let repeat data obtained from experiments conducted at NIST.  Table 3 
contains the reference sequences of the forward and reverse primers used by NIST to amplify and sequence the 
CGG repeat area and 222 flanking base pairs [2]. 
   
Expiration of Certification:   The certification of this SRM is valid until  31 August 2012 , provided the SRM is 
handled and stored in accordance with the instructions given in  this certificate.  This ce rtification is nullified if the 
SRM is damaged, contaminated, or modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:   NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If 
substantive technical changes occur that affect the certifica tion before the expiration of th is certificate, NIST will 
notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification.  
 
The overall direction and coordination of the technical measurements leading to the certification were perform ed by 
K.L. Richie and B.C. Levin of the NIST Biochemical Science Division. 
 
The analytical determination, technical  measurements and analysis of data fo r the certification of this SRM were 
performed by K.L. Richie and B.C. Levin of the NIST Biochemical Science Division. 
 
Reevaluation performed by K.L. Richie, J.P. Jakupciak, and M.C. Kline of the NIST Biochemical Science Division. 
 
The support aspects involved in the issuance of this SRM were coordinated through the NIST Measurement Services 
Division. 
 
 

 

 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  19 June 2007  
See Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Laurie E. Locascio, Chief 
Biochemical Science Division 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

SRM 2399 

 

Page 1 of 4 

tional Review Board and the Director of the Chemical 

 
Permissions:  The research needed to prepare SRM 2399 was deemed exempt from the policy of Part 27 of Title 15 
of the Code of Federal Regulations by the NIST Institu
1(b)(4) 
Science and Technology Laboratory. This work fit into the exemption category described in 15 CFR 27.10
which exempts:  “Research, involving the collection or study of existing data, documents, pathological speci mens, 
or diagnostic specimens, if, these sources are publicly availabl e or if the information is recorded by the investigator 
in such a manner that subjects cannot be identified, directly or through identifiers linked to the subjects.”  
Permission to use Fragile X samples from Corie ll Institute for Medical Research (Camden, NJ)   1 for SRM 2399 was 
provided by J.C. Beck, Ph.D., Director, Coriell Institute for Medical Research.   
 
Storage:  Store frozen at a temperature of  –20  oC.  DO NOT use a self-defrosting freezer because periodic cycling 
of temperatures may shorten the shelf-life of this SRM. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 
 
Minimize repeated freezing and th awing of these materials, as this might sh orten the shelf-life of the SRM.  If it is 
necessary to perform many repeated analyses, the SRM may  be thawed and the vial cont ents aliquoted into sterile 
vials that can be kept frozen until use.  Thawing can be con ducted at refrigerator temperatures or room temperature.  
After thawing, briefly centrifuge the sample tube to spin  down any condensate present in the tube cap and gently 
mix to obtain a homogenous solution.  The vial manufacturer warns against over-tightening the vial caps.   
 
Note:  As these are PCR products, you will need to dilute these samples at least 1 x 105 before proceeding with 
any technique that requires additional PCR amplification.  Please note that as components “G”, “H”, and “I” 
are less concentrated than components “A” thru “F”, you may need to adjust your dilutions accordingly.  
 
SOURCE AND ANALYSIS 
 
Source of Material:   DNA was obtained from Coriell Institute for Medical Research (Camden, NJ) and Quest 
Diagnostics, Inc. (Van Nuys, CA). 
Biochemical Science Division. 
 
NIST Analysis:   Modified PCR conditions, using the primers shown in Table 3, were developed at NIST [2] in 
order to successfully amplify the extended CGG regions in each triplet repeat sample.  To obtain the certified 
number of triplet repeats in each sample, the PCR products were purified using the Qiaquick PCR Purification Kit
 
(Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA) and then cycle-sequenced using fluorescent dye-labeled terminators and analyzed on an 
Applied Biosystems, Inc. 310 Genetic Analyzer.  Multiple
samples were performed.  Table 2 shows the results obtained from the multiple sequencing experiments.  
  

 The PCR products were prepared by  the NIST DNA Measurements Group, 

 PCR and sequencing reactions for each of the nine 

 

1Certain commercial equipment, 

                                                
  
experimental procedure. Such identificati on does not imply recommendation or endorseme nt by NIST, nor does it imply that the 
materials or equipment identified are the best available for this purpose. 
 
SRM 2399 

instruments, materials, or companies are identified in this paper to specify the 

Page 2 of 4 

 

 

 

Table 1.  Certified Number of Trinucleotide Repeats in Fragile X Samples 

 

 

 
Component 
Designation 
 
 
A 
 
B 
 
C 
 
D 
 
E 
 
F 
 
G 
 
H 
 
I 
 

 
Number of Certified 
CGG Repeats 

 
Gender of 
Donor 

 
Female 

41 (a)

Female 

 
20 (a)

30 Male 

51 Male 

60 Male 

73 Male 

96 Male 

118 Male 

__(b)

Male 

(a) Due to the two X chromosomes in female DNA, each chromosome  may have different numbers of triplet repeats. In the DNA 
in addition to a full expansion,  i.e., triplet repeats greate r 

from these two samples, there was a certifiable number of repeats 
than 200.  We are only certifying the smaller number of repeats. 

 
(b) “G” – genotyping analysis confirms the pr esence of two distinct CGG fragment sizes,  88/89 and 93.  Due to the complexity of 

this sample, the number of CGG repeats are not certified, but are provided as information values only. 

Note:  These values have all been confirmed through DNA sequencing.  Sequencing data were obtained with a 
BigDye Terminator Cycle Sequencing Kit, version 1.0 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA).  For each 
component, the certified value is the next smallest integer of the average of the numbers of trip
let repeats for that 
component as listed in Table 2, which also shows the variability of the actual count from experiment to experiment. 
 

SRM 2399 

 

Page 3 of 4 

Table 2.  Reproducibility of the Numbers of Fragile X Triplet Repeats Determined by  
Multiple Sequencing Reactions at NIST 

 
Experiment 
Number 
 
 
1 
 
2 
 
3 
 
4 
 

Number of Triplet Repeats 
(component designation) 

A      B       C       D         E       F           G(*)          H            I 

 
20 

 
30 

 
41 

 
51 

 
60 

 
73 

 
88/89 

 
96 

 
119 

20 30 41 51 60 73 88/89 97 

118 

20 30 41 51 60 73 88/89 97 

118 

20 30 41 ND 60 ND  ND  ND 

120 

 

 

ND: Not determined   

 

(*) Provided as information value only. 
 

  

 
Primer 
 
 
Forward 286 (a)
 
Reverse 555 (b)
 

Table 3.  Primers Used to Amplify the Region of Interest [3] 

Primer Sequence 

 
5’ GCT CAG CTC CGT TTC GGT TTC ACT TCC GGT 3’ 
 
5’ AGC CCC GCA CTT CCA CCA CCA GCT CCT CCA 3’ 
 

 
(a) Position 286 in the sequence of the 1 kb Pstl fragment containing the CGG repeats. 
(b) Position 555 in the sequence of the 1 kb Pstl fragment containing the CGG repeats. 

 
 
REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Standards and Guidelines for Clinical Genetics Laboratories

; American College of Medical Genetics:  

Bethesda, MD (2004); available at http://www.acmg.net/Pages/ACMG_Activities/stds-2002/stdsmenu-n-htm.  
[2]  O’Connell, C.D.; Atha, D.H.; Jakupc iak, J.P.; Amos, J.A.; Richie, K.L.;  Standardization of PCR Amplification 

for Fragile X Trinucleotide Repeat Measurements; Clinical Genetics, Vol. 61, pp. 13−20 (2002). 

[3]  Fu, Y.H.; Kuhl, D.P.A.; Pizzuti, A.; Pieretti, M.; Su

J.S.;  Richards,  S.;  Verkerk,  A.J.;  Holden,  J.J.; 
Fenwick, R.G., Jr.; Warren, S.T.; Oostra, B.A.; Nelson, D.L.; Caskey, C.T.; Variation of the CGG Repeat at the 
Fragile X Site Results in Genetic Instability:  Resolution of the Sherman Paradox; Cell, Vol. 67, pp. 1047−1058 
(1991). 

tliffe, 
tliffe, J.S.; Richards, S.; Verkerk, A.J.; Holden, J.J.; 

 
 
Certificate Revision History:  
22 December 2004 (Original certificate date). 
 

  

19 June 2007 (Change component G Trinucleotide Rep

eats to Information value and expiration date); 

   

Users of this SRM should ensure that the certificate in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished by 
contacting the SRM Program at:  telephone (301) 975-6776; fax (301) 926-4751, email srminfo@nist.gov; or via 
the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

 

 
 

 

SRM 2399 

 

Page 4 of 4 

