   Ned 

z 

*  Nationa!  drstitute  ot  Standards  ano  Technology 

Qertificate 

Standard  Reference  Material®  2523 

Optical  Fiber  Ferrule  Geometry  Standard 

Serial  Number: 

This  Standard  Reference  Materid  (SRM)  is  intended  pramanlyfor  calbrating  instummerts  used  for  diarreter  measurements  of artifacts 
sich  as  optical  fher  ferules.  Each  SRM  unit  isindpadnally  catbrated 
and  bears  a  unique  serial  murber.  The  SRM  conssts  of  asmele 
ceramuc  optical  fiber  ferrule  with  a  notch  etched  nto  one  end  to  identty  the  O°  plane  wed  for  postiomme.  The  outer  diameter  of  the 

of  the  0.124  om  hole has  been  preserved,  The  romdness 
ferrule  has  been  meanred  inthe  certer,  parallelto  the  notch.  The  condition 
data  in igure  1  have  been  inchided  for  mfoumation in  fiture  measurement  appleations  or  for  measurement  equipment  where  the 
roundness  of  the  artifact is  an  nnportat  conaderation. 

Certittied  Outer  Diameter  (forthe  central  2  nan  region) 

mim  +  0.000  050  mm 

Expiration  of  Certification:  The  certficaton  of  ths  $RM  is  valid  indefiuteb  within  the  meanmemernt  wiwertanties  specifieL 
provided  the  SRM  is  wed  m  accordance  with  the  Instuctions  for  Use  and  Handing and  C  are  sections  offis  certificate.  The  SEM 

may  wear  vith  repeated  use. 
certiication  of  this  SRM  2523  unit,  eortact  the  HIST  Calibration  Program  Office  at  (301)  975-2002. 

If  excessive  wear  is  suspected,  the  SRM  may  be  rehomed  to  HIST  for  venficahon. 

To  vert 

Discussion  of  Uncertaimiies:  Uncertanties  were  calculated  according  to  the  procedures  described  in  reference  [1].  Readily 
measired  (Type  A)  uncertamthes  were  assumed  to  be  normally  distubuted.  Estimated  [Type  Bi  uncertamties  were  assumed  to  be 
desenbed  by  a  rectangular  probability  distubution  fimection  and  wieorrelated. 
The  uncertamtes  were  combined  by  adding  ther 
variances,  where  the  variance  of a  rectangular  distubution is  one-thind  the  square  of  ats  half-width.  Table  1  Ists  all denthable  sources 
of uncertainty. 

The  ferrules  used  for  SRM  2523  were  donated  by  the  Coo  Ceramics  Company,  Electreme  Products  Group,  Golden,  CO. 

The  technucal  direction,  measurement  process  development  and  anabrsis,  and  physical  measurements  leading to  certification  of  this 
SRM  were  provided  by  JE.  Stoup  and  T.D.  Doiron  of  the  HIST  Precision  Engmeerng  Division,  and  M.  Young  of  the  MIST 
Opteelectromes  Division. 

The  support  aspects  mrvolved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  ths  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  Standard 

Reference  Matenals  Program by  R.J.  Gettngs. 

Gaithesbug,  MD  20899 

Certificate  Issue  Date:  15  August  1997 

Thomas  E.  Gills,  Chief 

Standard  Reference  Materials  Progran

Instructions  for  Use:  Use  of  ths  SRM  xs  relatereby  shaightfo2rand;  it  can  be  used  to  set  comparator type  struments  orto  calibrate 
absolute  measurmg  msbuments. 
Measurements  should be  made  radially  withm  five  degrees  of  the  locaton  of  the  notch.  To  extend  the  life  ofthe  SRM,  measurements 

The  SRM  should  be  used  with  the  central  2  mim  region  that  defines  the  cerbfied  area. 

should be  made  randonib  within  this  certified  ares.  Repeated use  of  the  exact  same  postition  on  the  ferme  is  not  recommended  as 
tt  will  camse  we  ar  at  this  position and  will  not  comecthy  sample  the  variations  in  diameter  of  the  fermle  m  the  resultme  measurements. 

CAUTION:  The  we  of meannement  forces  exceeding  1.1 
4  (4  oz)  may  mduce  an  uncorected  compression  of  the  ferrule  due  to 
the  existence  of  the  0.126  wm  diameter  hole  through  the  center  of  the  femule.  At  lower  forces,  the  ferme  behaves  as  a  solid  artifact 
and  the  resuling  defoumation  can  be  calculated  fromm  standard  deformation  formas  outIned  in  reference  [2].  This  SRM  should  not 
be  subjected  to  measurement  confgurations  that  may  wesult  m  appheation  of  lage  mstartanecus  forces  excee  ding  2.2  N  or  permanent 
damage  may  renilt. 

Handling  and  Care:  Handle  the  SEM  carefully.  Take  care  when  movme  the  ferrule  around  the  labomtory  and  positieeme  tt  mthe 
test  equipment  to  avoid  losmgit  or  mustalang tt  for  a  comumon  test  femule.  The  notched  and  face  has  been  intentionally left  unbeveled 
to  aid  inthe  identification  of  the  SRM. 

Follow  standard  laboratory  practice  to  extend  the  Ife  of  the  ferme  and  to  mamtain  the  integnby  of  the  rents.  Clean  the  ferme 
carefully  with  ethanol,  sopropyl  alcohol  or  acetone  before  each  we.  Lighth  blow  the  ferrule  dey  with  compressed  air,  and  allow  to 
thermalze  before  use.  Reclean  and  store  the  SRM  in  the  supplied  case  when  not  muse.  Keep  the  case  in  a  clean  laboratory 

environment  or  nside  a  dust-free  plastic  bag. 

Certification  of  Ferrule  Diameter:  The  outer  diameter  of  each  SRI  was  measured  wing  a  nuicrometer  combmed  with  a  laser 

displacement  ptedérometer.  Milipk  diareter  measurements  were  made  in  the  center  Pd  eachfermie  mthe  plme  defined  by  the  notch 
and  the  center ine  of  the  fermale.  This  measurement  wes  repeated  at  various  measurement  fowes  and  the  final  udefomned  diameter 
was  determmed  by  projectmg  the  total  results  to  zero  force.  These  measurements  sampled  only  the  effects  of  taper  mthe  central  2 
rin  and  did  not  sample  the  effects  of  roundness.  Mo  atternpt  was  made  to  locate  the  maxim  or  mame  diameter  posihons  on 
each  ferrule.

144 

23.3 

5.8 

«0.1 

ol 

O.1 

0.7? 

0.1 

rect.  dist  of  data 

rect.  dist.  of  data 

slope  anabysis 

2 

10% m 

#20.05°C 

+10Pa 

2% 

Source  of  Uncertanthy 

Anabrsis  Method 

(L  =  length =  2.5  non) 

1 

go  Equivalent  Value 

(m  ww) 

  

  

Table  1.  Uncestanty  Budget 

  

  

  

  

Index  of  Refraction  of  Ai 

uncertanty  of  calculation 

  

Fertule  Geometry:  central  2  ro 

central  5  non 

Elastic  Defounation  Correction 

Laser  Wavelength 

Ag  Temperahire  Measurement 

Au  Pressure  Measurement 

Vapor  Pressure  Measurement 

  

  

  

13 

O54 

rect.  dist. 

Abbe  Offset 

1  mmx  0.1" 

(0.5  x  10*)L) 

  

  

  

  

  

Instrument  Motion  Exror 

of  contact  foun  errors 

Micrometer  Contact  Geametyy 

Temperature  Measurement  of  Part 

Thennal  Expansion  Uncertainty 

(0.5  x  10%y0.1  *CL)]  =  0.05  x  10% 

 
    
    
  

Combined  Standard  Uncertamty 

Combined  Standard  Uncertanty 

rect.  dist.  of  0.02  °C  range 

Themnometer  Cabbration 

Expanded  Uncertanty 

(CTEW+  0.05  "C(L) 

&  =  2  (central  2  mm) 

Expanded  Uncertanty 

&  =  2  (central  S  mm) 

u,  (central  2  nom) 

  

  

  

ue(central  5  nun) 

19.4 

11.5 

31.6 

o1 

13 

O.1 

39 

63 

REFERENCES 

Tayler,  BN.  and  Kuyatt,  CE  ,"Guidelmes  for  Evahistme  and  Expressing the  Uncertamty  of  NIST 

fl] 
MIST  Techmeal  Note  1297,  0.8  Government  Prntme  Office,  Washmeton  DC,  (1994). 
[2] 

FPuttock,  M.J.  and  Thwaite,  E.G.,  Elastic  Compression  of  Spheres  and  Cylinders  at  Pout  ad  Line  Contact, 

Measuement  Resk," 

CSIRG, 

National  Standards  Laboratory  Teclnical  Paper  No.  25,  (1969). 

itis  tha  responsibil  ef  users  of  this  GRIM  te  assure  that  tha  cardficata  in  thatr  possassien  fs  currant 
avcompiishad  by  eontachng  tha  SRI  Progeom  at  Fhoma:  (300)  O75  6776  falact  *Carnfieates  4.  Fas: 
mal:  smunfo  Grist  gov  or  WW  Ret  its  nist.  go  isin. 

Thu  can  ba 
(707)  S2Od75L  a- 

