NT  OF  Cc 

% 

Sg 
¥ 

: 

;  National  Institute  of  Standards  &  Cechnologu 
 

Gertificate  of  Analusis

Standard Reference Material® 2584 

 
Trace Elements in Indoor Dust 
 
(Nominal Mass Fraction of 1 % Lead) 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended for use in the evaluation of methods and for the calibration of 
apparatus used to determine lead and other trace elements in dust.  SRM 2584 is composed of dust collected from 
vacuum cleaner bags used in the cleaning of interior dwelling spaces.  A unit of SRM 2584 consists of 8 g of particulate 
material, 99+ % of which passes a 100 m (No. 145) sieve.  
 
Certified Mass Fraction Values:  The certified values for five elements in SRM 2584 are listed in Table 1.  A NIST 
certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy in that all known or suspected 
sources of bias have been investigated or taken in account.  The certified values are based on measurements from two 
or  more  independent  analytical  methods  or  a  single  NIST  primary  method.    Analytical  methods  used  for  the 
characterization  of  this  SRM  are  given  in  Table 4.    Values  are  reported  as  mass  fractions [1],  on  a  dry  basis  (see 
Instructions for Drying) and are based on measurements using a sample mass of at least 100 mg. 
 
Reference  Mass  Fraction  Values:    Reference  values  for  mass  fractions  of  10 elements  are  given  in  Table 2.  
Reference values are noncertified values that are the best estimate of the true value; however, the values do not meet 
the NIST criteria for certification and are provided with associated uncertainties that may not include all sources of 
uncertainty.  The reference values and uncertainties are based on measurements from two or more analytical methods 
performed at NIST and/or the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). 
 
Information  Mass  Fraction  Values:    Information  values  are  provided  in  Table 3  for  the  mass  fractions  of 
22 additional elements.  Information values are considered to be values that will be of interest and use to the SRM 
user, but for which insufficient information is available to assess the uncertainties associated with the values.  The 
information values are based on measurements from a single analytical method.  Information values cannot be used 
to establish metrological traceability. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2584 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until 31 December 2023, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with the instructions given in this 
certificate (see “Instructions for Handling, Storage, and Use”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Overall  direction  and  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  the  certification  of  this  SRM  were 
performed by P.A. Pella and G.C. Turk of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Statistical consultation was provided by S.D. Leigh and K.R. Eberhardt of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Partial  financial  support  for  the  development  of  this  SRM  was  provided  by  the  U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (USEPA) under the direction of project managers S.L. Harper and M.E. Beard of the EPA Office of Research 
and Development, National Exposure Research Laboratory, Research Triangle Park, NC.  
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD  20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  29 January 2016 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Steven J. Choquette, Acting Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

 

SRM 2584 

Page 1 of 5 

Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
Stability:  This material is considered to be stable.   
 
Use:  To relate analytical determinations to the certified values in this Certificate of Analysis, a minimum sample 
mass of 100 mg should be used and the sample should be handled according to the “Instructions for Drying”.  Sample 
preparation procedures should also be designed to effect complete dissolution in order to relate the determined value 
to the certified value.  This SRM must be stored in an air conditioned or similar cool and dry environment away from 
sunlight and fumes. 
 
Instructions for Drying:  When nonvolatile elements such as cadmium, chromium, and lead are to be determined, 
samples should be oven dried for 2 h at 110 °C.  Volatile elements, such as arsenic and mercury, should be determined 
on samples as-received; separate samples should be dried according to these instructions to obtain a correction factor 
for moisture.  Moisture corrections should then be made to measurement values before comparing them to the certified 
values. 
 
Certified Mass Fractions:  The certified values for lead and cadmium  were determined by isotope dilution  mass 
spectrometry (IDMS).  The certified values for the remaining elements were determined by combining data from two 
or more independent analytical methods in the manner described by Schiller and Eberhardt [2].  Because of evidence 
of inhomogeneity, the uncertainties for arsenic, cadmium, and lead are each based on a 95 % prediction interval for 
the  true  value.    This  interval  includes  the  combined  effects  of  uncertainty  components  associated  with  material 
inhomogeneity, measurement uncertainty, and an allowance for differences between the analytical methods used [3].  
The uncertainties for chromium and mercury, which exhibited no evidence of inhomogeneity, are each based on a 
95 % confidence interval for the true value, including the combined effects of uncertainty components associated with 
measurement uncertainty and an allowance for differences between the analytical methods used.  The measurands are 
the  total  mass  fractions  of  the  elements  listed  in  Table 1  and  are  metrologically  traceable  to  the  SI  unit  for  mass, 
expressed as milligrams per kilogram. 
 

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fractions 
 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

 
 
 
 
 

17.4 
10.0 
135.0 
9761 

5.20 

 
 
 
 
 

4.2 
1.1 
9.1 
67 
0.24 

Element 

Arsenic (As) 
Cadmium (Cd) 
Chromium (Cr) 
Lead (Pb) 
Mercury (Hg) 

 

 
 
 

SRM 2584 

Page 2 of 5 

Reference Mass Fraction Values:  The uncertainties are  based on a 95 % confidence interval  for the true  value, 
including the combined effect of the measurement uncertainty for each method and an allowance for differences between 
the analytical methods used [2].  The measurands are the mass fractions of the elements listed in Table 1 as determined 
by  the  methods  listed  in  Table 4.    The  values  are  metrologically  traceable  to  the  SI  unit  for  mass,  expressed  as 
milligrams per kilogram. 
 

Table 2.  Reference Mass Fractions 
 

Element 

Aluminum (Al) 
Calcium (Ca) 
Iron (Fe) 
Potassium (K) 
Lanthanum (La) 
Magnesium (Mg) 
Sodium (Na) 
Phosphorus (P) 
Titanium (Ti) 
Zinc (Zn) 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

23 200 
63 300 
16 400 
9 500 
19 
15 900 
27 700 
2 000 
4 200 
2 580 

 
600 
  3 000 
  1 200 
  1 400 
2 
 
300 
 
  1 200 
120 
 
300 
 
150 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

Element 

Antimony (Sb) 
Barium (Ba) 
Beryllium (Be) 
Bismuth (Bi) 
Cerium (Ce) 
Cesium (Cs) 
Cobalt (Co) 
Copper (Cu) 
Gallium (Ga) 
Lithium (Li) 
Manganese (Mn) 
Molybdenum (Mo) 

Table 3.  Information Mass Fractions 
 
 

Element 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

14 
1300 

0.7 
9 
35 

1.4 

10 
320 

17 
370 

6.4 

5.5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Nickel (Ni) 
Niobium (Nb) 
Rubidium (Rb) 
Scandium (Sc) 
Selenium (Se) 
Silicon (Si) 
Strontium (Sr) 
Thorium (Th) 
Uranium (U) 
Vanadium (V) 
Yttrium (Y) 
 

90 
10 
33 
4 
2 
106000 
160 
4 
1.6 

34 
10 
 

 
 
COLLECTION, PREPARATION, AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
Collection:   Approximately  65 %  of  the  material  used  for SRM 2584  was  obtained  from  households  in  Montana, 
New Jersey, Ohio, and Wisconsin involved in lead poisoning intervention programs in which HEPA® vacuum cleaners 
were used to remove dust and other surface debris from homes where cases of lead poisoning had occurred.  This 
material was mixed with low level material taken from the sources used for the preparation of SRM 2583, namely 
routine vacuum cleaner bags from households, cleaning services, motels, and hotels from North Carolina, Maryland, 
Ohio,  and  New Jersey.    The  vacuum  cleaner  bags  were  collected  under  the  direction  of  the  Research  Triangle 
Institute (RTI)  and  the  EPA.    The  collection  process  was  coordinated  by  E.D. Hardison  and  D.A. Binstock  of 
RTI (Research Triangle Park, NC) under the leadership of W.F. Gutknecht. 
 
Preparation:  From RTI the bags were labeled, boxed and sent to Neutron Products (Dickerson, MD) for radiation 
sterilization, and then shipped to NIST for processing.  The initial screening and preparation to select suitable material 
were directed by P.A. Pella and performed by A.F. Marlow, C. Desai, and P. Seo of NIST.  Final processing and 
blending was performed by the NIST Office of Reference Materials.  The raw material from each bag was mixed 
and tumbled in a modified food processor using chopping blades and a compressed air jet.  While still tumbling, the 

                                                           

(1) Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this certificate in order to adequately specify 
the  experimental  procedure.    Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  National  Institute  of 
Standards and Technology nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for  the 
purpose. 
SRM 2584 

Page 3 of 5 

dust was separated from unwanted debris by vacuuming through a series of screens into a clean HEPA vacuum cleaner.  
The  dust  collected  in  this  manner  was  then  screened  through  a  90 m  stainless  steel  sieve  using  vibration  and  a 
vacuum.  Processed sub-lots of approximately 5 kg each were set aside and analyzed for lead by X-ray fluorescence 
in order to develop a blending protocol for the target lead concentration.  Selected high and low level sub-lots were 
blended in a cone blender and then bottled. 
 
Analysis:  Certification analyses were performed in the NIST Chemical Sciences Division.  Reference and information 
value  analyses  were  performed  by  the  USGS(Denver, CO)  using  inductively  coupled  plasma  mass  spectrometry 
(ICPMS) and wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (WDXRF) and by the NIST Chemical Sciences 
Division using instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA).  Analytical methods used for this SRM are given in 
Table 4. 

 
Table 4.  Methods Used for the Analysis of SRM 2584 

Method(a) 

Element(b) 

CVAAS 
HR-ICPMS 
ICPMS (NIST) 
ICPMS (USGS) 

ID-ICPMS 
ID-TIMS 
INAA 
WDXRF (USGS) 

Hg 
As, Cr 
Cd 
Al, Ba, Be, Bi, Ca, Ce, Co, Ca, Cu, Fe, Ga, K, La, Li, Mg, Mn, Mo, Na, 
Nb, Ni, P, Rb, Sb, Sc, Se, Sr, Th, Ti, U, V, Y, Zn 
Cd, Pb 
Cd, Pb 
As, Cr, Fe, Hg, La, Zn 
Al, Ca, Fe, K, Mg, Na, P, Si, Ti  

(a) Methods: 

CVAAS 
ICPMS 
ID-ICPMS 
ID-TIMS 
INAA 
HR-ICPMS 
WDXRF 

Cold vapor atomic absorption spectrometry 
Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry 
Isotope dilution quadrupole inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry 
Isotope dilution thermal ionization mass spectrometry 
Instrumental neutron activation analysis 
High resolution inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry 
Wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectrometry 

(b) Methods used for establishment of certified values are indicated by bold-face type. 
 
Analysts  NIST  Chemical  Sciences  Division:    C.M.  Beck,  J.R. Sieber,  S.J. Christopher,  R.D. Vocke,  A.F. Marlow, 
L.L. Yu, K.E. Murphy, R.L. Zeisler, M.S. Rearick.  
 
User Experience with SRM 2584 
 
In order to demonstrate user experience with SRM 2584, a number of laboratories analyzed this material, each using 
its  typical  method.    For  lead,  this  was  done  through  the  Environmental  Lead  Proficiency  Analytical  Testing 
Program (ELPAT), where SRM 2584 was loaded onto dust wipes and included as an unknown for ELPAT Round 
Number 022.  The ELPAT results have been converted from g/wipe to mg/kg.  Data for arsenic, cadmium, chromium, 
and mercury were supplied by volunteer laboratories in a round robin exercise organized by NIST.  For these elements 
the SRM  was analyzed directly.   Among the participants, the range of digestion procedures used included various 
standard  and  in  house  hotplate,  microwave,  hot  block,  and  water  bath  methods.    Instrumental  methods  included 
ICPMS, ICP Atomic Emission Spectrometry, Graphite Furnace AAS, Flame AAS, and CVAAS.  The results from 
this study were not used in calculating the certified values of SRM 2584.  The results are given in Table 5 below.  The 
summary statistics are based on 118 reported results for lead and 13 to 16 results for the other elements.  
 

Table 5.  Results of Round Robin Exercise 

Element 

Mean 
(mg/kg) 

As 
Cd 
Cr 
Hg 
Pb 

 
 
 
 
 
(a) s is one standard deviation. 

 21.0 
  9.8 
 70.3 
  4.1 

8 953 

SRM 2584 

Minimum 
(mg/kg) 

 17.5 
  8.2 
 47.4 
  1.0 

7 633 

Maximum 
(mg/kg) 

40.2 
13.9 
108 

  5.5 

9 845 

s(a) 
(mg/kg) 

  7.2 
1.6 
18.2 
  1.3 

602 

Page 4 of 5 

 

 
 
 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Thompson, A.;  Taylor, B.N.;  Guide  for  the  Use  of  the  International  System  of  Units (SI);  NIST  Special 
at 

Printing  Office:  Washington, DC 

Publication 811;  U.S.  Government 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/sp811/index.cfm (accessed Sep 2015). 

available 

(2008); 

[2]  Schiller, S.B.; Eberhardt, K.R.; Combining Data from Independent Chemical Analysis Methods; Spectrochimica 

Acta, Vol. 46B, pp. 1607–1613 (1991). 

[3]  JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data - Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement; 
(GUM 1995  with  Minor  Corrections),  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology (JCGM)  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Jan 2016);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:    Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed Jan 2016). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certificate Revision History:  29 January 2016 (Change of expiration date; editorial changes); 07 November 2010 (Change of expiration date; 
editorial changes); 15 December 1999 (Original certification date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting 
(301) 948-3730; 
telephone 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

fax 

 

SRM 2584 

Page 5 of 5 

