 

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material 2613a 
 
Carbon Monoxide in Air 
 
aol) 
(Nominal Amount-of-Substance Fraction 20 µmol/mol) 
 
This certificate reports the certified values for Lot 22-XX-E. 

e  number. 

Carbon Monoxide Concentration: 

19.72 µmol/mol  ±  0.25 µmol/mol 

Cylinder Number:  Sample 
Hydrotest Date:  March 1994 

Sample 
NIST Sample Number:  Sample 
Blend Date:  March 1995 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  a  primary  gas  mixture  for  which  the  amount-of-substance  fraction, 
expressed  as  concentration [1],  may  be  related  to  secondary  working  standards.    This  SRM  is  intended  for  the 
calibration of instruments used for carbon monoxide determinations and for other applications. 
 
This SRM mixture is supplied in a DOT 3AL-specification aluminum (6061 alloy) cylinder with a water volume of 
6 L.  Mixtures are shipped with a nominal pressure exceeding 12.4 MPa (1800 psig), which provides the user with 
0.73 m3 (25.8 ft3) of useable mixture.  The cylinder is the property of the purchaser and is equipped with a CGA-590 
brass value, which is the recommended outlet for this carbon monoxide mixture. 
 
Certified Value:  This SRM mixture has been certified for carbon monoxide concentration.  The certified value given 
below applies to the identified cylinder and NIST sample number.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  uncertainty  of  the  certified  value  includes  the  estimated  uncertainties  in  the  NIST  standards,  the  analytical 
comparisons to the lot standard (LS), and the uncertainty of comparing the LS with each of the mixtures comprising 
this lot.  The uncertainty is expressed as an expanded uncertainty U = kuc with uc determined by experiment and a 
coverage factor k = 2.  The true value for the carbon monoxide amount-of-substance fraction is asserted to lie in the 
interval defined by the certified value ± U with a level of confidence of approximately 95 % [2]. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2613a Lot No. 22-XX-E is valid from this certificate issue 
>d  in 
date, within the measurement uncertainties specified until 02 May 2024, provided the SRM is handled and stored in 
Handling  Information”).  The
accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this  certificate  (see  “Cylinder  and  Gas  Handling  Information”).    The 
certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Cylinder and Gas Handling Information:  NIST recommends the use of a high-purity, two-stage pressure regulator 
with a stainless steel diaphragm and CGA-590 outlet to safely reduce the pressure and to deliver this SRM mixture to 
the  instrument.    The  regulator  should  be  purged  to  prevent  accidental  contamination  of  the  SRM  by  repeatedly 
(minimum  three  times)  opening  the  valve  and  pressurizing  the  regulator,  then  closing  the  valve  and  releasing  the 
pressure safely into a vent line.  This SRM should not be used after the internal pressure drops below 0.7 MPa (100 psig).  
This SRM should be stored under normal laboratory conditions within the temperature range of 15 ºC to 30 ºC. 
 
Overall direction and coordination of the technical work required for certification of this SRM were performed by 
F.R. Guenther of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899  
Certificate Issue Date:  13 July 2016 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page

Steven J. Choquette, Acting Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

Chemical  Science 

Page 1 of 3 

   3a 

SRM 2613a 

W. 

carbon  monoxide 

 
Analytical measurements leading to the certification of the current SRM lot were performed by W.R. Miller of the 
NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Office  of  Reference
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
Traceability:    The  measurand  is  the  total  concentration  of  carbon  monoxide  in  air  and  the  certified  value  is 
metrologically traceable to the SI unit of micromoles of carbon monoxide per total moles of carbon monoxide and air. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  Periodic analyses of SRM units from this lot are performed at NIST to monitor 
stability.  If significant changes occur that affect the certification before the expiration of this certification, NIST will 
notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Mixture Preparation:  The gas mixtures comprising this SRM lot were prepared in accordance with NIST technical 
specifications by a commercial specialty gas vendor under contract to NIST.  The specifications stipulate that each 
SRM mixture be identical in carbon monoxide concentration and stable with time. 
 
Analytical Methods:  Analyses of the carbon monoxide concentration for this lot of cylinders were conducted by 
comparing each cylinder mixture to a representative cylinder chosen from the lot, the LS, using gas chromatography 
with a methanizer and flame ionization detection (GC/Meth/FID).  Assignment of the carbon monoxide concentration 
to the LS was accomplished by comparison to primary gravimetric standards using GC/Meth/FID. 
 
Homogeneity Analysis:  Each of the carbon monoxide mixtures that comprise this SRM lot was compared to the 
LS  using  GC/Meth/FID.    A  statistical  analysis  of  the  analytical  results  indicated  that  sample-to-sample  carbon 
monoxide concentration differences were not statistically significant.  This indicates that, within the precision of the 
NIST measurements, all of the cylinders comprising this SRM lot have identical carbon monoxide concentrations.  
Therefore, one concentration has been assigned to the entire SRM lot.  
 
Carbon Monoxide Concentration Value Assignment:  The certified carbon monoxide concentration for this SRM 
lot was computed from the assigned concentration for the lot standard and the homogeneity analysis. 
 
‘or  carbon  monoxid 
CAS Registry Numbers:  This SRM is certified for carbon monoxide in air.  The relevant CAS Registry numbers for 
these  components  are:  Carbon  Monoxide  CAS  Registry  82115-62-6;  compressed  air  CAS  Registry  132259-10-0.  
Other relevant CAS Registry numbers appear in the table below. 
 
Information Values:  Results for additional analyses performed during the certification process are given below.  The 
concentrations  reported  are  NOT  certified  values.    These  values  are  given  for  informational  purposes  only.    An 
information  value  is  considered  to  be  a  value  that  will  be  of  interest  to  the  SRM  user,  but  for  which  insufficient 
information is available to assess adequately the uncertainty associated with the value, or only a limited number of 
analyses were performed [3].  Information values cannot be used to establish metrological traceability. 
 
 
 
 

ion  monoxide 

Concentration/Method 

CAS Registry 

Constituent 

Argon 
Carbon dioxide 
Oxygen 
Total hydrocarbons 
(Expressed as methane) 

Nitrogen 

 

Balance 

0.92 % mol/mol [as determined by Mass Spectrometry (MS)] 

< 100 µmol/mol (as determined by MS) 

21.0 % mol/mol (as determined by MS) 

0.2 to 0.3 µmol/mol (as determined by GC/FID)  

 
 
 
 

 

7440-37-1 
124-38-9 
7782-44-7 
74-82-8 

7727-37-9 

3a 
SRM 2613a 

Page 2 of 3 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Thompson, A.;  Taylor, B.N.;  Guide  for  the  Use  of  the  International  System  of  Units  (SI);  NIST  Special 
at 

811;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC 

of  Units  (SI) 
(2008); 

Publication 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/sp811/index.cfm (accessed July 2016). 

available 

Joint  Committee 

[2]  JCGM 100:2008;  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in  Measurement;  (GUM 1995  with  Minor  
Corrections), 
at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  July 2016);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed July 2016). 

in  Metrology (JCGM) 

for  Guides 

available 

(2008); 

[3]  May, W.; Parris, R.; Beck, C.; Fassett, J.; Greenberg, R.; Guenther, F.; Kramer, G.; Wise, S.; Gills, T.; Colbert, J.; 
Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of Reference 
Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136;  U.S. Government  Printing  Office:  
Washington, DC (2000); available at: http://www.nist.gov/srm/publications.cfm (accessed July 2016). 

  
Certificate Revision History:  13 July 2016 (Change of expiration date; editorial changes); 19 August 2010 (This revision includes an extension 
of the certification period and minor editorial changes.); 13 January 2006 (This technical revision reports an extension of the certification period); 
 
16 August 2001 (This technical revision reports a change in the expiration date); 14 November 1995 (Original certificate date). 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting 
(301) 948-3730; 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm.
 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

telephone 

fax 

 

3a 
SRM 2613a 

Page 3 of 3 

