National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material 2647a  
 
Propane in Nitrogen 
 
) 
(Nominal Amount-of-Substance Fraction 2500 µmol/mol) 
 
This certificate reports the certified values for Lot 104-D-XX. 

yp 

Lot 

for which   the amount -of-substance fraction , 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is a primary gas mixture 
expressed as concentration  [1], may be related to secondary working standards.  This SRM is intended for the 
calibration of instruments used for propane determinations and for other applications. 
 
This SRM mixture is supplied in a DOT  3AL-specification aluminum (6061 alloy) cylinder  with a water volume of 
6 L.  Mixtures are shipped with a nominal pressure exceeding 12.4  MPa (1800 psig), which provides the user with 
0.73 m3 (25.8 ft3) of useable mixture.  The cylinder is the property of the purchaser and is equipped with a 
CGA-350 brass valve, which is the recommended outlet for this propane mixture.   
 
Certified Value:  This SRM mixture has been certified for  propane concentration.  The certified value given below 
applies to the identified cylinder and NIST sample number.  

yane 

 

 
e
H

Propane Concentration: 

2482.0 µmol/mol  ±  8.5 µmol/mol 

Cylinder Number:  SAMPLE 
Hydrotest Date:  October 2016 

PLE
NIST Sample Number:  SAMPLE 
Blend Date: September 2017 

 
 
 
 
 
ccuracy in that all known or 
A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its a
suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account
 [2].   The uncertainty of the certified value 
includes the  estimated uncertainties in the NIST standards, the analytical comparisons to th e lot standard  (LS), and 
the uncertainty of comparing the LS with each of the mixtures comprising this lot.  The uncertainty is expressed as an 
expanded uncertainty U = kuc with uc determined by experiment and a coverage factor k = 2.0.  The true value for the 
propane amount-of-substance fraction is asserted to lie in the interval defined by the certified val ue ± U with a level 
of confidence of approximately 95 % [3]. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2647a Lot No. 104-D-XX is valid from this certificate issue 
date, within the measurement uncertainties specified, until 19 July 2026, provided the SRM is handled and stored in 
accordance with the 
.   The 
certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Cylinder and Gas Handling Information:  NIST recommends the use of a high-purity, two-stage pressure regulator 
with a stainless steel diaphragm and CGA-350 outlet to safely reduce the pressure and to deliver this SRM mixture to 
the instrument.   The regulator should be purged to prevent accidental contamination of the 
SRM  by repeatedly 
he valve and releasing the 
(minimum three times) opening the valve and pressurizing the regulator, then closing t
  below 
pressure safely into a vent line
0.7 MPa (100 psig).  This SRM should be stored under normal laboratory conditions within the temperature  range of 
15 ºC to 30 ºC. 
 
Overall direction and coordination of the technical work required for certification of
J.T. Hodges of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899  
Certificate Issue Date:  25 February 2020 

instructions given in this   certificate  (see “Cylinder and Gas Handling Information”)

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

.    This SRM should not be used

  after the internal pressure drops

 this SRM were performed by 

cal  Sciences 

Page 1 of 3 

  

SRM 2647a  

propane 

‘propane 

Office  of  Reference 
T  Office of Reference 

Analytical measurements leading to the certification of th e  current SRM lot were performed by  W.R. Miller  and 
M.E. Kelley of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division.   
 
Support aspects involved in the issuance of this SRM were coordinated through the NIS
Materials. 
 
Traceability:  The measurand is the total concentration of propane in nitrogen and the certified value is metrologically 
traceable to the SI unit of micromoles of propane per total moles of propane and nitrogen. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
tive 
technical  changes occur that affect the certification before the expiration of th
is  certificate, NIST will notify the 
purchaser. Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Mixture Preparation:  The gas mixtures comprising this SRM lot were prepared in accordance with NIST technical 
specifications by a commercial specialty gas vendor under contract to NIST.  Th e specifications stipulate that each 
SRM mixture be identical in propane concentration and stable with time. 
 
Analytical Methods:  Analyses of the propane concentration for this lot of cylinders were conducted by comparing 
equipped 
each cylinder mixture to a representative cylinder chosen from the lot, the LS,  using a gas chromatograph equipped 
with a thermal conductivity detector (GC/TCD) to primary gravimetric standards.   
 
Homogeneity Analysis:  Each of the  propane mixtures that comprise this SRM lot was compared to the LS using  a 
GC/TCD.  A statistical analysis of the analytical results indicated that sample
-to-sample  propane  concentration 
differences were not statistically significant.  This indicates that, within  the precision of the NIST measurements, all 
of the cylinders comprising this SRM lot have identical  propane concentrations.  Therefore, one concentration has 
been assigned to the entire SRM lot.  
  
— 
Propane Concentration Value Assignment:    The certified  propane concentration for this SRM lot was computed 
from the assigned concentration for the lot standard and the homogeneity analysis. 
 
CAS Registry Number s:   This SRM is certified for  propane in nitrogen.  The relevant CAS Registry numbers  for 
these components are: propane CAS Registry 74-98-6; nitrogen CAS Registry 7727-37-9. 
 
Information Values:  Results for additional analyses performed during the certification process are given below.  The 
concentrations reported are NOT certified value s.  These values are given for informational purposes only.  An 
information value is considered to be a value that will be of intere
information is available to assess adequately the uncertainty associated with  the value, or only a limited number of 
analyses were performed [3].  Information values cannot be used to establish metrological traceability. 
 
 
Constituent 
Water 
Total hydrocarbons 
Nitrogen 
 
 

 
< 1 µmol/mol (as determined by P2O5 adsorption)  
 
78 nmol/mol (as determined by GC/FID - Expressed as Propane) 
Balance 

CAS Registry 
7732-18-5 
74-98-6 
7727-37-9 

st to the SRM user, but for which insufficient 

Concentration/Method 

d  propane 

Propane

propane 

for 

 
 

 

 

- 

SRM 2647a  

Page 2 of 3 

REFERENCES 
 

[1]  Thompson, A.;  Taylor, B.N.;  Guide for the Use of the International System of 

Units (SI);  NIST Special 

Publication 811; U.S. Government Printing Office:  Washington,
https://www.nist.gov/pml/special-publication-811 (accessed Feb 2020). 

 DC (2008); available at 

[3] 

[2]  May, W.; Parris,  R.; Beck,  C.; Fassett,  J.; Greenberg,  R.; Guenther,  F.; Kramer,  G..; Wise,  S.; Gills,  T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value -Assignment 
of Reference Materials for Chemical Measurements;  NIST Special Publication 260 -136; U.S. Government 
Printing Office:  Washington, DC (2000); available at https://www.nist.gov/system/files/documents/srm/SP260-
136.PDF (accessed Feb 2020). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections); Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology  (JCGM) (2008); available at 
https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Feb 2020); see also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt,  C.E.;  Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results; NIST Technical Note 1297; U.S. Government Printing Office:  Washington,
https://www.nist.gov/pml/nist-technical-note-1297 (accessed Feb 2020). 

 DC (1994); available at 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users of this SRM should ensure that the Certificate of Analysis in their possession is
accomplished by contacting the SRM Program:  telephone (301)
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

 current.  This can be 

 975-2200; fax (301)

 948-3730, 

SRM 2647a  

Page 3 of 3 

