National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material 2658a 
 
Oxygen in Nitrogen 
 
(Nominal Amount-of-Substance Fraction 10 % mol/mol) 
mol) 
 
This certificate reports the certified values for Lot 72-D-XX. 

Fraction 

oxygen 

Oxygen Concentration: 

9.918 % mol/mol  ±  0.022 % mol/mol 

Cylinder Number:  <<Sample>> 
Hydrotest Date:  February 2006 

<<Sample>> 
NIST Sample Number:  <<Sample>> 
Blend Date:  March 2006 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  a  primary  gas  mixture  for  which  the  amount-of-substance  fraction, 
expressed  as  concentration [1],  may  be  related  to  secondary  working  standards.    This  SRM  is  intended  for  the 
calibration of instruments used for oxygen determinations and for other applications. 
 
ater  volume  of 
This SRM mixture is supplied in a DOT 3AL-specification aluminum (6061 alloy) cylinder with a water volume of 
6 L.  Mixtures are shipped with a nominal pressure exceeding 12.4 MPa (1800 psig), which provides the user with 
0.73 m3 (25.8 ft3) of useable mixture.  The cylinder is the property of the purchaser and is equipped with a CGA-590 
brass valve, which is the recommended outlet for this oxygen mixture.   
 
Certified Value:  This SRM mixture has been certified for oxygen concentration.  The certified value given below 
applies to the identified cylinder and NIST sample number.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
A NIST certified  value is a  value  for  which NIST has the  highest confidence in its accuracy  in that all known or 
suspected sources of bias  have been investigated or taken into account [2].  The uncertainty of the certified value 
includes the estimated uncertainties in the NIST standards, the analytical comparisons to the lot standard (LS), and 
the uncertainty of comparing the LS with each of the mixtures comprising this lot.  The uncertainty is expressed as an 
expanded uncertainty U = kuc with uc determined by experiment and a coverage factor k = 2.  The true value for the 
oxygen amount-of-substance fraction is asserted to lie in the interval defined by the certified value ± U with a level of 
confidence of approximately 95 % [3]. 
 
issue 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2658a Lot No. 72-D-XX is valid from this certificate issue 
date, within the measurement uncertainty specified, until 03 February 2024, provided the SRM is handled and stored 
in  accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this  certificate  (see  “Cylinder  and  Gas  Handling  Information”).    The 
certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Cylinder and Gas Handling Information:  NIST recommends the use of a high-purity, two-stage pressure regulator 
with a stainless steel diaphragm and CGA-590 outlet to safely reduce the pressure and to deliver this SRM mixture to 
the  instrument.    The  regulator  should  be  purged  to  prevent  accidental  contamination  of  the  SRM  by  repeatedly 
(minimum  three  times)  opening  the  valve  and  pressurizing  the  regulator,  then  closing  the  valve  and  releasing  the 
pressure  safely  into  a  vent  line.    This  SRM  should  not  be  used  after  the  internal  pressure  drops  below  0.7 MPa 
(100 psig).  This SRM should be stored under normal laboratory conditions within the temperature range of 15 ºC to 
30 ºC. 
 
Overall direction and coordination of the technical work required for certification of this SRM were performed by 
F.R. Guenther of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899  
Certificate Issue Date:  23 February 2016 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 
SRM 2658a 

Steven J. Choquette, Acting Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

Chemical  Sciences

Page 1 of 3 

  

2  oxyger 

The analytical measurements leading to the certification of the current SRM lot were performed by M.E. Kelley of 
the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Office  of  Reference 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
ogically 
Traceability:  The measurand is the total concentration of oxygen in nitrogen and the certified value is metrologically 
traceable to the SI unit for mass expressed as moles of oxygen per total moles of oxygen and nitrogen. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Mixture Preparation:  The gas mixtures comprising this SRM lot were prepared in accordance with NIST technical 
specifications by a commercial specialty gas vendor under contract to NIST.  The specifications stipulate that each 
SRM mixture be identical in oxygen concentration and stable with time. 
 
Analytical Methods:  Analyses of the oxygen concentration for this lot of cylinders were conducted by comparing 
each cylinder mixture to a representative cylinder chosen from the lot, the LS, using an oxygen-specific paramagnetic 
process analyzer.  Assignment of the oxygen concentration to the LS was accomplished by comparison to primary 
gravimetric standards using the paramagnetic analyzer. 
 
Homogeneity Analysis:  Each of the oxygen  mixtures that comprise this SRM lot was compared to the LS using 
oxygen  paramagnetic.    A  statistical  analysis  of  the  analytical  results  indicated  that  sample-to-sample  oxygen 
concentration  differences  were  not  statistically  significant.    This  indicates  that,  within  the  precision  of  the  NIST 
measurements, all of the cylinders comprising this SRM lot have identical oxygen concentrations.  Therefore, one 
concentration has been assigned to the entire SRM lot. 
 
Oxygen Concentration Value Assignment:  The certified oxygen concentration for this SRM lot was determined 
from the assigned concentration for the lot standard and the homogeneity analysis. 
 
This  SRM  is  certified  for  oxygen
CAS Registry Numbers:  This SRM is certified for oxygen in nitrogen.  The relevant CAS Registry numbers for 
these components are: oxygen CAS Registry 7782-44-7; nitrogen CAS Registry 7727-37-9. 
 
Information Values:  Results for additional analyses performed during the certification process are given below.  The 
concentrations  reported  are  NOT  certified  values.    These  values  are  given  for  informational  purposes  only.    An 
information  value  is  considered  to  be  a  value  that  will  be  of  interest  to  the  SRM  user,  but  for  which  insufficient 
information is available to assess adequately the uncertainty associated with the value, or only a limited number of 
analyses were performed [2].  Information values cannot be used to establish metrological traceability. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Constituent 
 
Argon 
Water 
Carbon dioxide 
Carbon monoxide 
Total hydrocarbons 

µmol/mol 
40 
0.8  μmol/mol 
0.3  μmol/mol 
0.1  μmol/mol 
0.01 μmol/mol 

Concentration 

 

SRM 2658a 

Page 2 of 3 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Thompson, A.;  Taylor, B.N.;  Guide  for  the  Use  of  the  International  System  of  Units  (SI);  NIST  Special 
at 

Publication  811;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington,  DC 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/sp811/index.cfm (accessed Feb 2016). 

available 

(2008); 

[2]  May, W.; Parris, R.; Beck, C.; Fassett, J.; Greenberg, R.; Guenther, F.; Kramer, G.; Wise, S.; Gills, T.; Colbert, J.; 
Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of Reference 
Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136;  U.S. Government  Printing  Office:  
Washington, DC (2000); available at: http://www.nist.gov/srm/publications.cfm (accessed Feb 2016). 

Committee 

[3]  JCGM 100:2008; Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement; (GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections), 
Joint 
at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Feb 2016);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed Feb 2016). 

Metrology (JCGM) 

available 

(2008); 

Guides 

for 

in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Certificate Revision History:  23 February 2016 (Change of expiration date; editorial changes); 17 September 2010 (This revision includes an 
extension of the certification period and minor editorial changes.); 12 July 2006 (Original certificate date). 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
This  can  be
accomplished  by  contacting 
(301) 948-3730; 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm.
 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

current. 
fax 

telephone 

 

SRM 2658a 

Page 3 of 3 

