 

 

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate 
Standard Reference Material 2798a 

 

 
Vickers Microhardness of Nickel 
 
Serial No.:  SAMPLE 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  as  a  primary  standard  for  use  in  calibrating  Vickers-type 
microhardness testers and is certified for mean Vickers hardness values (HV) at a load of 4.905 N (0.500 kgf).  A 
unit of SRM 2798a consists of a square test block of electrodeposited bright nickel on an AISI 1010 steel substrate.  
The test block  measures 1.35 cm on each side, is approximately 750 μm thick, and is mounted in a thermosetting 
epoxy.  Five indentations were made on the SRM’s polished surface for each load at positions illustrated in Figure 1.  
The mean Vickers HV and the corresponding expanded uncertainty for the mean of five future indentations for each 
load tested are presented in Table 1.  Vickers hardness values are reported as Vickers HV in units of kgf/mm2 and SI 
units of gigapascal (GPa).  Each SRM was individually measured and bears a serial number imprinted on the epoxy 
mount. 
 

Table 1.  Certified Mean Vickers HV and Expanded Uncertainty, U 

Load 

N 
4.905 

(kgf) 
(0.500) 

Mean HV 

GPa 
SAMPLE 

(kgf/mm2) 
(SAMPLE) 

 
 
Expiration  of  Certification:    The  certification  of  SRM 2798a  is  valid  indefinitely,  within  the  measurement 
uncertainty specified, provided the SRM is handled, stored, and used in accordance with the instructions given in 
this  certificate  (see  “Instructions  for  Handling,  Storage,  and  Use”).    Accordingly,  periodic  recalibration  or 
recertification of this SRM is not required.  Aside from indentation, any physical damage or other alteration of the 
surface of the specimen, including all processes that remove surface material such as repolishing, will invalidate the 
certification. 
 
Maintenance  of  SRM  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If 
substantive technical changes occur that affect the certification, NIST will notify the purchaser.  Registration (see 
attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
The coordination of the production and the technical measurements leading to the certification of SRM 2798a were 
performed by D.R. Kelley of the Thin Film and Nanostructure Processing Group of the NIST Metallurgy Division.  
This  SRM  was  fabricated  by  D.R. Kelley  and  C.E. Johnson  and  certified  by  H.B. Gates  of  the  Electrochemical 
Processing Group of the NIST Metallurgy Division. 
 
Statistical analysis of the data was performed by N.F. Zhang of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Measurement  Services 
Division. 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  04 September 2012 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

Frank W. Gayle, Chief 
Metallurgy Division 

 

SRM 2798a 

 

Page 1 of 3 

 

1 

4 

5 

2 

3 

SRM 2798a Serial No.:  SAMPLE 
SAMPLE 
Calibration Date: 
H.B. Gates 
Calibrated by: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 1.  Position of Indentations 

 
NIST  Specimen  Preparation:    The  starting  material  for  this  SRM  was  a  flat  sheet  of  electroformed  nickel, 
23 cm  46 cm  1 mm,  over a  steel  substrate.    The nickel sheet/steel  substrate  combination  was  cut  into  coupons 
that were mounted and highly polished to provide flat and parallel surfaces suitable for Vickers microindentations. 
 
NIST Certification Procedure:  The Vickers microindentations are located in the center and near the four corners 
of the block as illustrated in Figure 1.  These indentations were made in accordance with the Vickers hardness test 
principle, in which a diamond indenter, in the form of a right pyramid with a square base, is forced into the surface 
of  a  test  piece  followed  by  measurement  of  the  two  diagonal  lengths  of  the  indentation  left  in  the  surface  after 
removal  of  the  test  force.    The  certified  mean  Vickers  HV  of  this  block  is  shown  in  Table 1.    Measurements  on 
randomly selected blocks have established that the HV is uniform across the surface of each block. 
 
Hardness values for this SRM were obtained using a dedicated, calibrated hardness tester.  The loading mechanism 
of  the  hardness  tester  was  calibrated  with  a  miniature  precision  load  cell  that  was  calibrated  with  NIST  certified 
weights.  The indentation sizes were measured on an optical microscope using a filar micrometer and/or an image 
analyzer calibrated with a NIST certified stage micrometer.  When using the 10 X filar micrometer for measuring 
the  indentation  size,  the  total  magnification  was  500 X  using  a  50 X  dry  objective  lens  with  a  numerical 
aperture (NA) of 0.80.  For measurement with the image analyzer, the microscope 50 X dry objective lens was used 
with a 1 X video camera lens.  
 
The Vickers HV is computed from the following equation [2] 
 
 

HV





/2)
 

( sin 2P 
2

d



 P
 

 
1.8544
2

d

kgf/mm

2

 
where P is the indenter load in kilogram-force, d is the average of the two diagonal lengths in millimeters, and α is 
the face angle of the ideal indenter, which is 136. 
 
Since the units of gram-force (gf) and micrometers (μm) are normally used in this field, the constant in Equation 1 
can be modified to accommodate the conversion factors to ease use during computation.  The equation for Vickers 
HV, still expressed in kgf/mm2, becomes 
 

HV



 P'
 

 
1854.4
2

d

'

kgf/mm

2

 
where P' is expressed in gf and d ' in µm. 
 
To express the Vickers HV in SI units of GPa, the constant must be further modified to obtain 
 

HV



 
18.185

 P
 

2

GPa   

or   HV



 P'
 

18185
 
2

GPa

d

 
 
Discussion of Uncertainty:  The uncertainty in the certified value of the hardness measurement is expressed as an 
uncertainty,  U,  at  the  95 %  level  of  confidence,  and  is  calculated  according  to  the  method  described  in  the  ISO 
Guide [1].  The expanded uncertainty is calculated as U = kuc, where uc is intended to represent, at the level of one 
prediction standard deviation for the mean of five future observations, the combined uncertainty due to material 
variability  and  measurement  uncertainty.    The  coverage  factor,  k,  is  determined  from  the  Student’s  t-distribution 
corresponding to the 4 degrees of freedom and 95 % confidence. 
 

d

'

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

SRM 2798a 

 

Page 2 of 3 

 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
The  metallic  block  is  durable  but  may  be  susceptible  to  tarnish  or  corrosion  in  an  environment  of  high  humidity 
and/or acidic sulfur or chlorine bearing gases or liquids.  Oils, fingerprints, or skin oils should be removed before 
and after use of the SRM.  The SRM unit may be cleaned with ethyl alcohol and soft wipe materials.  The surface 
polish should be protected from abuse.  The blocks must NEVER BE REPOLISHED, as this will invalidate the 
certification. 
 
This SRM is intended for use with microhardness testing machines whereby a Vickers indentation can be made and 
then measured with an optical microscope.  When using this SRM, a minimum of five indentations must be made 
for accurate comparison to the certified mean HV and expanded uncertainty. 
 
When making new indentations in the block, special care should be taken to ensure that the loading rates and load 
duration are as prescribed by the applicable Vickers hardness test method standard.  There should be no vibrations or 
impact imparted to the machine during the indentation cycle.  The surface of the test block and the indenter must be 
clean  and  should  not  contain  skin  oils,  which  could  alter  the  friction  between  the  indenter  and  block  surface.  
Indentations may be placed in any region of polished surface provided that they are not within 1.9 mm of any edge, 
since  slight  edge  rounding  from  polishing  can  distort  the  indentation  shape  and  affect  the  size.    Guidelines  for 
indentation spacing can be found in applicable Vickers hardness test method standards. 
 
When measuring indentations, proper illumination and focus of the indentation tips are critical to obtain good clarity 
and contrast.  The apparent indentation size will be affected by the magnification used since the numerical aperture 
of the objective lens establishes the resolution limits.  A total magnification of 400 X or higher is recommended. 
 
Magnifications should be checked by use of a calibrated stage micrometer.  Filar micrometers and image analyzing 
systems should be calibrated with stage micrometers.  Proper use of filar crosshairs is essential.  For best results, it is 
critical that the instructions of the hardness machine manufacturer and the applicable Vickers hardness test method 
standard be followed.  Additional information on the preparation of this SRM can be found in references 2 and 3. 
 

REFERENCES 

 
[1] 

JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(ISO  GUM  1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology (JCGM)  (2008); 
(accessed 
available 
Sep 2012); see also Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of 
NIST  Measurement  Results;  NIST  Technical  Note  1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC 
(1994); available at http://physics.nist.gov/Pubs/ (accessed Sep 2012). 

http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf 

at 

[2]  Kelley, D.R.;  Johnson, C.E.;  Lashmore, D.S.;  Electroformed  Microhardness  Standards;  Proceedings  37th 

Meeting of the Mechanical Failure Prevention Group; Cambridge University Press, pp. 55-58 (1984). 

[3]  Kelley, D.R.;  Johnson, C.E.; Lashmore, D.S.;  Fabrication and  Certification of  Electroformed  Microhardness 
Standards; Proceedings of IMS/ASTM Meeting; ASTM Special Technical Publication, Issue 889, pp. 186–195 
(1985). 

 
 
 
 
 
Certificate  Revision  History:    04 September 2012  (Certification  procedure  updated;  editorial  changes);  10 October 2003  (Original  certificate 
date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users of this SRM should ensure that the Certificate in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished by 
contacting the SRM Program: telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the 
internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

SRM 2798a 

 

Page 3 of 3 

