National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate 
Standard Reference Material® 2821 

 

 
Rockwell Hardness 30N Scale - High Range (Nominal 79 HR30N) 
 
Serial Number:  SAMPLE 
 
This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  a  transfer  standard  intended  primarily  for  use  in  the  calibration  and 
verification of the performance of Rockwell hardness equipment using the Rockwell Hardness 30N scale (HR30N).  
A  unit  of  SRM 2821  is  a  steel  test  block,  nominally  64 mm  in  diameter  and  15 mm  thick,  having  a  polished  test 
surface  described  by  a  micro-engraved  circle  52 mm  in  diameter  as  shown  in  Figure 1.    Each  SRM  unit  bears  a 
unique serial number on the edge of the block. 
 
SRM 2821  is  individually  certified  by  performing  seven  hardness  measurements  at  specific  locations  on  the  test 
surface as indicated in Figure 1.  Recommended test conditions, procedures, and precautions for the proper use of 
this SRM are provided in this certificate.  In order to perform calibration or verification measurements over the full 
usable range of the HR30N scale, this SRM may be used in conjunction with SRM 2819 Rockwell Hardness 30N 
Scale - Low  Range  (Nominal  45 HR30N)  and  SRM 2820  Rockwell  Hardness  30N  Scale - Mid  Range 
(Nominal 64 HR30N). 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2821 is valid indefinitely, within the uncertainty specified, 
provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this  certificate  (see 
“Instructions for Handling, Storage, and Use”).  Accordingly, periodic recalibration or recertification of this SRM is 
not required.  However, the certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance  of  SRM  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  material  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If 
substantive technical changes occur that affect the certification before the expiration of this certificate, NIST will 
notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
Hardness measurements leading to the certification of this SRM were performed by R.D. Jiggetts and S.R. Low of 
the NIST Metallurgy Division.   
 
Statistical analysis was performed by W.S. Liggett of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division.   
 
Geometric verification of the NIST Rockwell diamond indenter used in the certification of this SRM was conducted 
by J.F. Song and T.V. Vorburger of the NIST Precision Engineering Division.   
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the NIST Measurement Services 
Division. 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certification Issue Date:  08 December 2011 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

Frank W. Gayle, Chief 
Metallurgy Division 

SRM 2821 

Page 1 of 6 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
This SRM is made of steel, and thus is susceptible to scratches, dents, and other mechanical damage, particularly on 
the top and bottom surfaces, as well as being susceptible to corrosion from moisture and reaction to skin oils.  The 
SRM is wrapped in corrosion inhibiting paper and packaged in a protective wooden box. 
 
Storage:  When not in use, the SRM should be rewrapped and stored in the box or in a manner having equivalent or 
better mechanical and corrosion protection. 
 
Handling:    The  user  should  wear  protective  gloves,  such  as  lint-free  cotton  or  powder-free  latex  gloves,  while 
handling the SRM.  If gloves are not worn, the SRM should be cleaned with ethyl alcohol or other suitable cleaning 
agent and dried thoroughly before storing.  (See “Cleaning the SRM,” below.)  The SRM should be held only by the 
round edge to avoid excessive contact with the top and bottom surfaces. 
 
Use:  The SRM is intended for use with all equipment capable of conducting an HR30N indentation hardness test.  
The  HR30N  hardness  test  is  defined  as  requiring  the  use  of  a  Rockwell  spheroconical  diamond  indenter  and  the 
following  test  forces:    a  preliminary  force  of  29.4 N (3 kgf)  and  an  additional  test  force  of  264.8 N (27 kgf)  that, 
when  combined  with  the  preliminary  force,  generates  the  total  test  force  of  294.2 N (30 kgf).    The  Rockwell 
hardness tester should be set up and operated in accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer and as 
required by applicable test method standards.  All hardness measurements must be made within the circle engraved 
on the test surface of the SRM. 
 
Test Environment:  It is recommended that the hardness tester to be calibrated or verified be kept in a temperature- 
and humidity-controlled environment maintained at 23 °C  2 °C (73 °F  5 °F) and a relative humidity of 50 % or 
less.    The  tester  must  also  be  in  a  location  that  is  free  from  shock  or  vibration  that  could  affect  the  hardness 
measurements. 
 
Block Support Anvil:  Use of a flat anvil is recommended (i.e., an anvil that can support the SRM for indentation 
anywhere  on  its  test  surface).    However,  when  calibrating  or  verifying  a  hardness  tester,  the  same  anvil  must  be 
used with the SRM that will be used on the tester after the calibration or verification. 
 
Cleaning the Tester Anvil and Indenter:  The anvil and indenter diamond tip should be thoroughly cleaned per 
recommendations  from  the  manufacturer.    In  the  absence  of  cleaning  instructions  from  the  manufacturer,  it  is 
recommended that the anvil and indenter be cleaned with ethyl alcohol and dried using a lint-free paper towel or 
cloth.  Then the surfaces should be blown clean of dust using filtered air, such as from a commercial compressed air 
can or bottle.  DO NOT blow clean by mouth. 
 
Cleaning  the  SRM:    Prior  to  use,  it  is  recommended  that  the  SRM  be  cleaned.    A  recommended  method  for 
cleaning the SRM is to gently wipe the top and bottom surfaces with clean cotton or a non-abrasive cloth thoroughly 
wetted  with  ethyl  alcohol.    The  metal  surfaces  should  immediately  be  dried  using  a  soft  lint-free  paper  towel  or 
cloth  before  the  alcohol  evaporates.    This  cleaning  must  be  performed  in  a  manner  that  prevents  a  residue  from 
remaining on the top and bottom surfaces.  The alcohol cleaning should be followed by blowing the surfaces clean 
of dust with filtered air.  The top and bottom surfaces should NOT be touched after cleaning. 
 
Seating the Anvil and Indenter:  Prior to making hardness indentations on the SRM, the tester anvil and indenter 
must be adequately seated.  This can be accomplished by performing Rockwell hardness tests on a material using 
the  highest  test  force  the  tester  is  capable  of  applying.    The  seating  tests  should  be  repeated  until  successive 
measurement values show no trend of increasing or decreasing hardness. 
 
Placement  of  the  SRM  on  the  Anvil:    Immediately  before placing the SRM on the anvil, the top surface of the 
anvil and the bottom surface of the SRM should be cleaned as described above.  The SRM should be placed at once 
on the anvil before dust can return.  The top test surface of the SRM should be blown free of dust prior to testing 
and occasionally during the period of use.  The SRM should be slid several times back and forth over the surface of 
the  anvil  to  help  seat  the  block  on  the  anvil.    Any  time  the  SRM  is  lifted  from  and  replaced  on  the  anvil,  the 
procedure described above in this paragraph should be repeated. 
 
Preliminary Indentation:  When a flat anvil is used, at least one preliminary HR30N test should be performed at 
any  location  on  the  test  surface  of  the  SRM.    The  preliminary  test  will  help  seat  the  SRM  on  the  anvil.    The 
measured hardness value of the preliminary test should be ignored.  A preliminary indentation is not necessary when 
using a spot anvil. 
 

SRM 2821 

Page 2 of 6 

Indentation  Location:    The  user  is  cautioned  not  to  make  any  indentation  such  that  it  contacts  a  previous 
indentation, the engraved circle, or the NIST logo; doing so may damage the indenter.  No indentation should be 
made outside the engraved circle.  Under no circumstance shall an indentation be made on the bottom surface of the 
block. 
 
Test Cycle:  This SRM unit has been certified by performing Rockwell HR30N scale hardness tests using a specific 
test  cycle.    The  HR30N  test  cycle  may  be  characterized  by  specifying  four  test  cycle  parameters  that  have  been 
determined  to  have a significant influence on the measurement results.  The four parameters are:  (1) preliminary 
test force dwell time; (2) total force dwell time; (3) recovery dwell time; and (4) indenter velocity during application 
of the additional force.  These parameters are defined as follows: 
 

Preliminary  Test  Force  Dwell  Time – the  time  period  beginning  when  the  preliminary  force  is  fully 
applied and ending when the first baseline measurement of indenter depth is taken. 
 
Total Force Dwell Time – the time period during which the total force is fully applied. 
 
Recovery Dwell Time – the time period beginning when the additional test force is fully removed returning 
the applied force to the preliminary force level and ending when the final measurement of indenter depth is 
taken. 
 
Additional Force Indenter Velocity – the indenter velocity during the application of the additional force.  
For  Rockwell  HR30N scale  tests,  it  is  the  final  25 %  of  the  total  force  application  that  has  the  most 
significant effect on the measurement result. 
 

The test cycle parameters used for the certification of this SRM are given in Table 1.  To minimize the uncertainty 
in  the  hardness  measurement,  a  test  cycle  should  be  used  that  replicates,  as  closely  as  possible,  the  SRM 
certification test cycle parameters.  Deviations from the SRM test cycle in dwell times or force application rate will 
result in measured hardness values that deviate from measurements made using the SRM certification test cycle. 

 
Table 1.  Specifications for the SRM Test Cycle Parameters 
 

Parameter 

Value 

NIST Tolerance 

Preliminary Test Force Dwell Time 

Total Force Dwell Time 

Recovery Dwell Time 
Average Indenter Velocity 
[during the final 25 % of total force application] 

3 s 

5 s 

4 s 

20 µm/s to 42 µm/s 

 0.1 s 

 0.1 s 

 0.1 s 

 

 
Indentation  Spacing:    Rockwell  hardness  measurements  can  be  influenced  by  nearby  indentations  that  were 
previously  made.    The  amount  that  a  measurement  can  be  affected  is  dependent  on  the  distance  between 
indentations and the number of surrounding indentations.  The measured hardness increases as the distance between 
indentations becomes smaller and the number of surrounding indentations is increased. 
 
For  this  SRM,  NIST  studies  have  shown  that  when  a  test  is  made  too  close  to  previously  made  indentations,  the 
resulting hardness value may be higher than the true hardness.  The user should consider this possible elevation of 
hardness when making measurements on this SRM.  Table 2 lists the effect of indentation-to-indentation spacing for 
this  SRM.    These  stated  elevations  in  hardness  are  given  to  illustrate  the  possible  effects  of  making  tests  near 
previously made indentations, and should not be used as correction values for measurements made too close to other 
indentations. 
 

Table 2.  Effect of Indent Spacing 
 

Spacing distance in an 
indentation-filled test area 
(center to center) 

Increase in measured 
hardness 

 

 

2.0 mm 

1.5 mm 

 

 

+0.04   HR30N 

+0.10   HR30N 

SRM 2821 

Page 3 of 6 

Certified Average Hardness Value:  The certified average hardness value is an estimate of the average hardness 
across the test surface of the block.  Hardness varies slightly across the surface due to material non-uniformity and 
can  be  modeled  by  a  mathematical  function.    The  average  hardness  value  is  defined  as  that  hardness  function 
integrated over the test block surface divided by the surface area.  The certified average hardness value is based on 
the seven NIST hardness measurements and on the material uniformity as discussed below.  This average value is 
defined as the hardness function integrated over the test block surface divided by the surface area, and as such, is 
the  average  of  the  predicted hardness values for all test surface locations, and not the arithmetical average of the 
seven NIST measurements.  However, since the locations chosen for the seven NIST measurements provide a good 
representation of the surface, the certified average hardness is close in value to the arithmetical average.  The NIST 
certified  average  hardness  value  is  only  somewhat  analogous  to  the  certified  value  assigned  to  a  commercially 
calibrated  hardness  test  block  that  is  typically  calculated  as  the  arithmetical  average  of  several  calibration 
measurements. 
 

Certified Average Hardness Value: 

SAMPLE    0.23  HR30N 

 
Uncertainty  of  the  Certified  Average  Hardness  Value:    The  expanded  uncertainty,  U,  in  the  certified  average 
hardness was calculated using U = kuc, where uc is the combined standard uncertainty calculated according to the 
ISO  Guide [1],  and  k = 2  is  the  coverage  factor.    The  value  of  uc  represents  the  combined  effect  of  the 
individual sources of uncertainty listed in Table 3.  These sources include uncertainties due to deviations of the 
NIST  standardizing  tester  and  indenter  from  the  defined  requirements  for  the  Rockwell  hardness  test  (forces, 
depth measurement, test cycle, and indenter shape) [2].  The value of uc is calculated as follows: 
 

 

u

2

2



2



2

. 

c

2
 
Table 3.  Sources of Uncertainty for the Certified Average Hardness Value 
 

3

4

1

Type 

Uncertainty Source 

Standard Uncertainty 

1 

2 

3 

4 

uc 

U 

A 

A 

B 

B 

 

 

Material Uniformity and Measurement 
Repeatability 

Day-to-Day Reproducibility 

NIST Standardizing Hardness Tester 

NIST Standardizing Indenter 

Combined Standard Uncertainty 

Expanded Uncertainty 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  0.013  HR30N 

  0.035  HR30N 

  0.045  HR30N 

  0.100  HR30N 

  0.116  HR30N 

  0.23  HR30N 

 
The  expanded  uncertainty,  U,  provides  an  indication  of  the  accuracy  of  NIST’s  estimate  of  the  true  value  of  the 
average hardness of this SRM.  The uncertainty should not be interpreted as the range in expected hardness values 
that would be measured across the test surface, nor is it a limit of acceptable hardness values for verifying Rockwell 
hardness  equipment.    Similarly,  1,  2,  3,  and  4  are  uncertainty  components  that  contribute  to  the  overall 
uncertainty  in  the  certified  average  hardness  value  and  are  not  ranges  of  expected  hardness  results  due  to  each 
source of uncertainty. 
 
The  certified  average  hardness  value  provides  the  user  with  a  comparison  value  for  performing  indirect 
verifications [2]  of  Rockwell  hardness  machines  for  the  HR30N  scale.    In  doing  the  comparison,  the  user  cannot 
measure the surface-wide average hardness, only the hardness values at a collection of properly-spaced points.  This 
distinction leads to two modes of certification, which in the case of this SRM differ only in the uncertainty due to 
material uniformity and measurement repeatability.  The first mode is certification of the average discussed above.  
The second mode is prediction of what hardness readings NIST would obtain with its machine and indenter were it 
to measure the points chosen by the user.  Let the number of points chosen by the user be denoted by n.  For the 
second mode of certification, the certified value is the same as in the first mode, but the uncertainty due to material 
uniformity and measurement repeatability is 0.035*sqrt (1/7 + 1/n).  

SRM 2821 

Page 4 of 6 

Certification Procedure:  The NIST standardizing hardness tester is a specially designed machine using directly 
loaded dead-weights for applying the required forces, and a laser interferometry displacement sensor for measuring 
the  depth  of  indentation.    The  geometry  of  the  NIST  standardizing  diamond  indenter  was  verified  using  a  stylus 
instrument [3].  The indenter measurements and expanded uncertainties are 197.09 µm  0.64 µm for the tip radius 
and 119.96°  0.02° for the cone angle. 
 
Several test blocks were randomly selected from each production batch, and hardness measurements were made over 
the  test  surface  of  each  SRM  using  the  NIST  standardizing  hardness  tester  and  diamond  indenter.    Hardness  was 
measured by indentation tests in accordance with the Rockwell Hardness HR30N scale principle [2] and following 
the test cycle given in this certificate.  By analyzing the hardness profile of this set of test blocks, information on 
material uniformity was developed.  NIST determined that the hardness varies across the surface of each block and 
varies  differently  from  block  to  block.    This  hardness  variation  is  due  primarily  to  the  nature  of  steel  and  the 
manufacturing process. 
 
Rockwell Hardness HR30N scale measurements were then made at eight locations on the test surface of each SRM as 
illustrated  in  Figure 1.    The  first  indentation,  labeled  “Seat,”  was  made  to  ensure  that  the  new  test  block  was 
adequately seated on the anvil.  “Seat indentation” data are potentially erroneous; thus, the resulting hardness value 
from this first indentation was discarded.  The seven hardness tests that followed, labeled 1 through 7, were used in 
the determination of the SRM certified average hardness values for that SRM.  The seven NIST measurement values 
and  locations  are  given  in  Table 4.    The  x,  y  coordinate  system  is  such  that  location  x = 0,  y = 0  is  at  the  block 
center (NIST indentation 4) and oriented with the NIST logo at the bottom of the block as illustrated in Figure 1. 
 

Table 4.  NIST Hardness Measurements for Individual Test Block Locations 
 

Location 

Hardness Value (HR30N) 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

x 

– 10 

20 

– 10 

0 

10 

10 

– 20 

y 

17 

0 

0 

17 

– 17 

– 17 

0 

SAMPLE 
SAMPLE 

SAMPLE 

SAMPLE 

SAMPLE 

SAMPLE 

SAMPLE 

 
Traceability:  This SRM can be used to demonstrate that a user’s measurements are traceable to the HR30N scale 
as determined by NIST; however, the procedures required to demonstrate traceability are varied depending on the 
user’s needs.  In general, acceptable transfer of the NIST hardness values to the user can be accomplished in three 
ways:  (1) verification  within  tolerances – verifying  that  the  user’s  measurements  are  in  agreement  with  NIST 
certified  values  within  acceptable  tolerance  limits;  (2) verification  within  uncertainties – verifying  that  the  user’s 
measurements are in agreement with NIST certified values within the uncertainty ranges of the user’s and NIST’s 
measurements;  and  (3) calibration – calibration  of  the  performance  of  the  user’s  hardness  machine  to  the  NIST 
certified values by making appropriate mathematical corrections, and then verifying that the user’s corrected values 
are in agreement with NIST certified values within the uncertainties of the user’s and NIST’s measurements.  Each 
of the three methods requires differing levels of effort by the user to determine the accuracy in their measurements. 
 

SRM 2821 

Page 5 of 6 

m
m

0

30

20

10

-10

-20

-30

  

1

5

7

4

2

Seat

   
  

3

6

-30

-20

-10

10

20

30

0
mm

 

 
Figure 1.  Test surface of SRM indicating the location and sequence of certification indentations (shown as black 
dots), and illustrating the appearance of the engraved circle and NIST logo.  The first indentation, labeled “Seat”, 
was made to ensure that the new test block was adequately seated on the anvil.  The indentations labeled 1 through 
7 indicate the indentation sequence used in certification. 

 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(ISO GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections); Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (JCGM) (2008); available 
at http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf (accessed Dec 2011); see also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note  1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC (1994);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed Dec 2011). 

[2]  ASTM E18;  Standard  Test  Methods  for  Rockwell  Hardness  and  Rockwell  Superficial  Hardness  of  Metallic 

Materials; Annu. Book ASTM Stand. 

[3]  Song, J.F.;  Rudder, F.F. Jr.;  Vorburger, T.V.;  Smith, J.H.;  Microform  Calibration  Uncertainties  of  Rockwell 

Diamond Indenters; J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., Vol. 100 (1995). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users of this SRM should ensure that the Certificate in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished by 
contacting the SRM Program:  telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 926-4751; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the 
Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

SRM 2821 

Page 6 of 6 

