National  Institute  of  Standards  &  Cechnology 
Certificate  of  Analysis 

Standard  Reference  Material®  2830 

Knoop  Hardness  of  Ceramics 

Block  Serial  Number: 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  intended  for  calibrating  hardness  testers. 
It  is  certified  for  the  average 
diagonal  length  and  the  average  hardness  value.  The  SRM  consists  of  a  hot-isostatically  pressed  silicon  nitride  block  with 
five  NIST  indents,  made  at  a  load  of  19.6  N  (2  kgf)  in  the  center  of  the  polished  face. 
Each  SRM  is  individually 
calibrated  and  bears  a  serial  number  scribed  on  the  opposite,  unpolished  face  of  the  block. 

The  SRM  is  hot-isostatically  pressed  silicon  nitride,  Norton  Advanced  Ceramics  Grade  NBD-200,  fabricated  in  the  form 
of  a  22  mm  (7/8")  diameter  bearing  ball  which  has  been  ground  and  polished  to  provide  a  very  flat,  parallel,  high  quality 
surface  for  Knoop  indents,  with  a  final  thickness  of  9.54  mm  +  0.01  mm.  The  hardness  is  uniform  across  the  polished 
surface. 
The  certified  average  diagonal  Jength  and  the  average  hardness  for  this  block  are  shown  in  Table  1. 

Five  indents  were  made  in  the  center  of  each  block  by  a  dedicated  hardness  testing  machine. 

Table  1:  Certified  Diagonal  Length  and  Hardness 

  

Average  Diagonal 
Length,  d 

Average  Diagonal  Length 
Uncertainty” 

Average  HK2 
Hardness” 

    
  
    

0.12  GPa  (0.86  %) 

(0.42  %) 

0.6m 

um 

  

  

Average  HK2 
Uncertainty 

* 
** 

The  uncertainty  of  the  average  diagonal  length  for  five  indentations, 
The  first  number  is  the  average  hardness  in  units  of  GPa,  The  second  number,  in  brackets,  is  the  average  hardness  expressed  as  a  dimensionless  number. 
The  average  hardness  should  be  calculated  by  averaging  the  five  individual  hardness  results,  and  should  nor  be  caiculated  from  the  average  diagonal  size, 

HK2  designates  hardness  at  an  applied  load  of  19.6  N  (2  kgf).  The  uncertainties  are  at  the  95  %  confidence  level.  The 
numbers  in  parenthesis  are  two  times  the  coefficient  of  variation  expressed  as  a  percentage. 

Period  of  Certification:  There  is  no  need  for  periodic  recertification  assuming  proper  storage,  handling,  care,  and  use 
of  this  SRM. 
However,  repolishing  the  surface,  or  other  mechanical  damage  to  the  surface  will  invalidate  the 
certification. 

This  SRM  was  prepared  and  certified  by  R.J.  Gettings,  G.D.  Quinn,  A.W.  Ruff,  and  L.K.  Ives  of  the  NIST  Ceramics 
Division.  The  assistance  of  J.  Fu  of  the  NIST  Precision  Engineering  Division  with  the  SEM  calibration  procedures  is 
gratefully  acknowledged. 

Statistical  Analysis  of  the  data  was  performed  by  N.F.  Zhang  of  the  NIST  Statistical  Engineering  Division. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated 
through  the  Standard  Reference  Materials  Program  by  N.M.  Trahey  and  R.J.  Gettings. 

Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 
February  13,  1996 

Thomas  E,  Gills,  Chief 
Standard  Reference  Materials  Program 

  

Page  |  of  4

Storage  and  Handling:  The  ceramic  block  is  very  durable  and  not  susceptible  to  corrosion,  but  the  surface  polish  should 
be  protected  from  abuse.  Oils,  fingerprints,  or  skin  oils  should  be  removed  before  indentation.  The  SRM  unit  may  be 
cleaned  with  ethyl  alcohol  and  soft  tissues. 
If  necessary,  mild  rubbing  with  a  rubber  eraser  on  the  end  of  a  pencil  can 
be  used  to  dislodge  a  tenacious  contaminant.  The  blocks  should  never  be  repolished,  as  the  size  or  raised  edges  of  the 
NIST  indentations  would  be  altered. 

Certification  Procedures:  The  indents  are  located  in  the  center  of  the  block  and  are  evenly  spaced  with  the  exception 
of  the  first  indent  as  illustrated  in  Figure  1.  The  indents  were  made  in  accordance  with  ASTM  E  384-89,  Test  Method 
for  Microhardness  of  Materials  [1],  and  the  ASTM  C  1326-96  Standard  Test  Method  for  Knoop  Indentation  Hardness 
of  Advanced  Ceramics  [2]. 
In  particular,  the  requirements  of  E  384  for  separate  verification  of  microhardness  machines 
and  calibration  of  standardized  hardness  test  blocks,  sections  14.1  and  17  were  followed  with  the  exception  that  only  one 
group  of  five  indentations  has  been  made.  Measurements  of  selected  blocks  have  established  that  hardness  is  uniform 
across  the  block  face. 

| 

These  indents  were  examined  and  each  photographed  at  a  nominal  magnification  of  600  x  in  a  scanning  electron 
microscope  (SEM).  Selected  indentation  tips  were  also  photographed  at  1500  x  or  3000  x. 
Indent  sizes  were  then 
measured  from  the  SEM  micrographs.  Precise  magnifications  were  established  for  every  block  by  using  an  SRM  484d 
Scanning  Electron  Microscope  Magnification  Standard.  The  polished  surface  and  the  indentations  of  each  certified  block 
were  also  inspected  by  an  optical  microscope  at  magnifications  of  100  x  and  400  x.  Additional  details  on  the  preparation 
of  this  SRM  can  be  found  in  References  3,  4,  and  5. 

The  Knoop  hardness  of  each  indentation  is  computed: 

where  P  is  the  indent  load  in  N  (or  kgf),  d  is  the  diagonal  size  in  mm,  and  a 
is  the  indenter  constant,  which  for  an  ideal 
Knoop  indenter  with  angles  of  172°  30'  and  130°  00',  is  14.229,  The  «  for  the  NIST  indenter  used  for  this  SRM  was 
14.240.  The  hardness  was  calculated  using  a  load  of  19.627  N  (2.0025  kgf)  which  was  the  average  load  value  during 
the  SRM  production.  The  gravitational  constant  was  9.801  m/sec?  on  the  grounds  of  NIST. 

Discussion  of  Uncertainties:  The  uncertainty  estimates  were  made  in  accordance  with  the  NIST  and  ISO  Guides  16,7]. 
Uncertainties  were  either  evaluated  through  statistical  means,  Type  A,  or  by  other  means,  Type  B.  Overall  uncertainties 
were  estimated  by  summing  the  variances  of  individual  sources  of  uncertainty,  with  the  exception  of  the  uncertainty  in 
HK  wherein  the  variance  in  diagonal  length  was  weighted  by  a  factor  of  four  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  propagation 
of  error.  Uncertainties  listed  in  Table  1  and  discussed  below  are  at  the  95  %  confidence  level  (20)  in  each  instance.  The 
values  in  parenthesis  are  the  uncertainties  as  a  percentage  and  are  two  times  the  coefficient  of  variation.  Uncertainties 
for  the  average  values  of  d  and  HK  were  estimated  by  dividing  the  uncertainty  for  an  individual  measurement  by  the 
Square  root  of  five,  which  is  the  number  of  indentations  measured. 

The  uncertainty  in  the  length  of  an  individual  indent  made  by  NIST  was  estimated  by a  series  of  repeatability  experiments 
on  a  prototype  lot  of  specimens  to  be  1.5  um  (1.08  %).  The  total  uncertainty  is  the  square  root  of  the  sum  of  squares  of 
the  systematic  uncertainty  (0.40  %)  associated  with  the  certified  SRM  484d  length  standard  and  the  random  uncertainties 
associated  with  photographing,  interpreting,  and  measuring  (1.00  %)  the  indent  length. 

The  variation  in  indentation  sizes  within  an  SRM  block  was  calculated  from  the  pooled  results  for  all  specimens  made 
in  the  SRM  production  run  and  was  estimated  to  be  1.34  um  (0.94  %).  This  variation  is  comparable  to  the  uncertainty 
of  the  measurement  method.  A  two  way  analysis  of  variance  of  all  SRM  production  run  results  indicated  that  there 
probably  is  a  block-to-block  variation  in  diagonal  lengths  and  hardness,  but  that  within  a  block,  the  indentation  size  as 
an  effect  was  not  statistically  significant. 
In  other  words,  within  a  single  block  there  was  no  statistically  significant 
variation  in  indent  size. 

The  uncertainty  in  the  average  diagonal  length  for  the  five  indentations  was  estimated  from  the  total  population  of  indents 
in  the  SRM  set,  and  is  0.94  %/5  =  0.42  %,  where  the  sample  size  is  five. 

The  uncertainty  in  the  average  HK  is  for  a  sample  size  of  five  indentations  and  includes  the  components  of  uncertainty 
in  the  load,  P,  (0.25  %)  which  includes  a  repeatability  uncertainty 
(+  0.06  %)  and  a  drift  uncertainty  (+  0.24  %);  the 
indenter  constant,  a,  (+  0.31  %);  and  the  diagonal  length,  d,  (+  0.94  %). 

Page  2  of  4

Instructions  for  Use:  This  SRM  is  intended  to  be  used  with  all  hardness  and  microhardness  testing  machines  whereby 
a  Knoop  indent  can  be  made  and  then  measured  with  an  optical  microscope. 

The  user  must  observe  and  measure  the  lengths  of  the  five  NIST  indentations  in  order  to  verify  that  the  test  machine  optics 
and  the  length  measuring  apparatus  are  optimized. 
The  NIST  indentations  are  located  in  the  center  of  the  polished 
surface.  The  indent  long  diagonal  should  be  measured  to  within  0.0005  mm  with  an  optical  microscope.  The  apparent 
indent  size  will  be  affected  by  the  magnification  used  since  the  objective  lens  numerical  aperture  (NA)  sets  the  resolution 
limits.  A  total  magnification  of  400  x  or  higher  is  recommended  and  is  in  accordance  with  the  Standard  Test  Method  for 
Knoop  Indentation  Hardness  of  Advanced  Ceramics,  which  requires  objective  lenses  with  NA's  from  0.65  to  0.90. 
Magnifications  of  400  x  or  500  x  are  commonly  available  with  most  hardness  machines,  many  of  which  have  40  x  or 
50  x  objectives  and  10  x  eyepieces.  Magnifications  less  than  400  x  are  not  recommended  since  the  indentation  lengths 
will  be  underestimated  by  1  pm  to  2  pm  or  more.  Magnifications  should  be  checked  by  the  use  of  a  calibrated  stage 
micrometer. 

The  Knoop  indent  is  long  and  the  tips  slender,  which  can  make  precise  determination  of  the  tip  location  difficult.  It  is 
critical  that  the  instructions  of  the  hardness  machine  manufacturer  and  the  appropriate  standard  test  methods  be  followed 
scrupulously.  Proper  illumination  and  focus  of  the  tips  is  critical to  obtain  good  clarity  and  contrast.  Proper  use  of  filar 
crosshairs  is  essential. 

The  microstructure  of  the  SRM  is  uniform  and  contains  tiny  inclusions  which  appear  white  in  a  reflected-light  microscope. 
These  are  very  helpful  to  aid  focussing  and  to  serve  as  reference  points  near  the  indent  tips  as  illustrated  in  Figure  2. 
The  grain  size  of  the  material  is  of  the  order  of  1  um.  Occasionally  a  grain  or  grains  near  the  tip  will  dislodge  and  cause 
the  indent  edge  to  be  slightly  irregular  as  shown  in  Figure  2.  This  is  unavoidable,  but  is  much  less  a  problem  with  this 
SRM  than  for  many  ceramics.  In  a  few  instances,  a  tiny  crack  may  extend  from  the  tip  of  the  indent  as  shown  in  Figure 
2,  which  may  create  some  uncertainty  as  to  where  the  tip  ends.  Should  the  detected  feature  wander  or  meander  off  the 
axis  of  the  indent,  it  is  safe  to  assume  that  it  is 
a  crack,  and  the  feature  should  not  be  read  as  the  indent  tip.  The  certified 
indentation  diagonal  lengths  do  not  include  the  length  of  the  crack,  if  such  exist. 

Producing  New  Indentations:  The  user  can  also  make  new  indentations  in  the  block  but  special  care  should  be  taken 
to  ensure  that  the  loading  rates  and  load  duration  are  as  prescribed  by  the  appropriate  standard. 
There  shall  be  no 
vibrations  or  impact  imparted  to  the  machine  during  the  indentation  cycle.  The  surface  must  be  clean  and  should  not 
contain  skin  oils  which  could  alter  the  friction  between  the  indenter  and  the  block  surface.  Indentations  may  be  placed 
in  any  region  of  the  polished  surface  provided  that  they  are  not  within  1  mm  of  the  rim,  since  slight  edge  rounding 
from  the  polishing  can  distort  the  indentation  shape  and  affect  the  size.  The  indents  should  not  be  made  too  close  to  each 
other,  should  lateral  cracks  (which  may  form  in  some  ceramics)  cause  interference.  The  indentation  centers  should  be 
no  closer  than  1.5  x  the  diagonal  length. 

Note:  Ina  few  rare  instances,  a  block  may  contain  a  cluster  of  small  inclusions  or  a  faint  black  spot. 
If  observed,  it  is 
recommended  that  indentation  not  be  placed  in  such  areas,  although  they  may  be  harmless.  A  few  blocks  may  have  tiny 
scratches,  which  should  also  be  avoided. 

REFERENCES 

El] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

{7] 

ASTM  E  384-89  Standard  Test  Method  for  Microhardness  of  Materials,  ASTM  Annual  Book  of  Standards,  Vol.  3.01, 
(1989). 
ASTM  C  1326-96  Standard  Test  Method  for  Knoop  Indentation  Hardness  of  Advanced  Ceramics,  ASTM  Annual  Book 
of  Standards,  Vol.  15.01,  (1996). 
Gettings,  R.J.,  Quinn,  G.D.,  Ruff,  A.W.,  and  Ives,  L.K.,  “New  Hardness  Standard  Reference  Materials  (SRMs)  for 
Advanced  Ceramics,"  Ceram.  Eng.  and  Sci.  Proc.,  Vol.  15,  #5,  pp.  717-826,  (1994). 
Gettings,  R.J.,  Quinn,  G.D.,  Ruff,  A.W.,  and  Ives,  L.K..,  “Development  of  Ceramic  Hardness  Reference  Materials,”  pp. 
617-624  in  New  Horizons  for  Materials,  Ed.  P.  Vincenzini,  Proceedings  of  the  8th  World  Ceramic  Congress,  CIMTEC, 
Florence,  Italy,  July,  1994,  Techna,  Florence,  (1995), 
Gettings,  R.J.,  Quinn,  G.D.,  Ruff,  A.W.,  and  Ives,  L.K.,  “Hardness  Standard  Reference  Materials  (SRMs)  for  Advanced 
Ceramics,"  Proceedings  of  the  9th  International  Symposium  on  Hardness  Testing  in  Theory  and  Practice,"  Dusseldorf, 
Germany,  23-24  November,  1995,  VDI,  Dusseldorf,  VDI,  Berichte  1194,  pp.  255-264,  (1995). 
Taylor,  B.N.  and  Kuyatt,  C.,  “Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement  Results," 
NIST  Tech.  Note  1297,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office,  Washington,  D.C.,  (1994). 
Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in  Measurement,  ISBN  92-67-10188-9,  Ist  Ed.  ISO,  Geneva,  Switzerland,  (1993). 

Page  3  of  4

Figure  i 

Five  Knoop  indentations  are  located  in  the  middle  of  the  block. 

Figure  2 

Details  of  the  indentation  tips. 

Hairline  crack  at  tip 

  

\ 

+ 

cd 

\  ‘ 

Inclusions  in  the  microstructure 

h 

Dislodged  grain  on  indent  edge 

  

  

Page  4  of 4

