National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material® 2859 
 
Restricted Elements in Polyvinyl Chloride  

Poly 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  validation  of  chemical  and  instrumental 
methods of analysis of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and materials of similar matrix for restricted, additive and tramp 
element contents.  It can be used to validate value assignment of in-house reference materials.  A unit of SRM 2859 
consists of one bottle containing approximately 25 g of PVC pellets. 
 
Certified Mass Fraction Values:   Certified values for constituents of SRM 2859 are reported in Table 1 as mass 
fractions of the elements  in a PVC  matrix [1].  A NIST certified value  is a  value  for  which NIST has  the  highest 
confidence in its accuracy in that all known or suspected sources of bias have been taken into account [2].  A certified 
value is the present best estimate of the true value.  The certified values are the measurands and are metrologically 
traceable  to  the  SI  derived  unit  of  mass  fraction  (expressed  as  percent).    The  expanded  uncertainty  estimates  are 
expressed at a confidence level of approximately 95 %. 
 

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fraction Values for SRM 2859 Restricted Elements in Polyvinyl Chloride 

alues  for  SRM 

 
Constituent 

Cadmium (Cd) 
Calcium (Ca) 
Chromium (Cr) 
Iron (Fe) 
Lead (Pb) 
Mercury (Hg) 
Sulfur (S) 
Tin (Sn) 

Mass Fraction 
(%) 

Expanded Uncertainty 
(%) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.00734 
3.603 
0.0716 
0.00635 
0.07982 
0.07695 
0.1087 
0.1362 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0.00044 
0.065 
0.0016 
0.00095 
0.00096 
0.00069 
0.0052 
0.0018 

 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2859 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
2  with  instructions  given  in  this  certificate 
until 01 July 2024, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with instructions given in this certificate 
ris 
(see “Instructions for Handling, Storage, and Use”).  Reference values are expected also to remain valid within this 
period.  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
,  NIST  will  notify  the  purchaser.
technical changes occur that affect the certification before the expiration of this certificate, NIST will notify the purchaser.  
Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination of technical measurements for certification was performed by J.R. Sieber of the NIST Chemical Sciences 
Division. 
 
Statistical consultation for this SRM was provided by N.A. Heckert of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  21 March 2019 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

 

Page 1 of 4 

  

SRM 2859 

Office  of  Reference 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
ING,  STORAGE,  AND  USE 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
Polyvinyl chloride pellets may be analyzed either in as-received form, cryogenically ground to powder for methods 
requiring  dissolution,  or  melt  pressed  for  methods  that  require  a  larger  area  of  measurement,  such  as  X-ray 
fluorescence  spectrometry (XRF).    To  relate  analytical  determinations  to  the  certified  values  in  this  Certificate  of 
Analysis, a minimum test portion of 100 mg should be used when it has been prepared as powder.  See below for 
additional  information  on  melt  pressing  and  exposure  to  X-rays.    A  bottle  containing  unused  material  should  be 
recapped immediately and stored at room temperature away from light. 
 
To  use  the  uncertainty  estimates  given  in  this  certificate,  divide  the  expanded  uncertainty  by  k = 2  to  obtain  the 
combined standard uncertainty.  The effective degrees of freedom of the combined standard uncertainty are ≥60. 
 
Heterogeneity of SRM 2859 is such that measurements of very small quantities will be subject to high variance.  The 
element  Fe  is  characterized  by  discrete  locations  of  high  concentrations.    These  locations  range  in  size  from 
approximately 50 µm to several hundred micrometers, and they may contain 10 times to 100 times the overall mass 
fraction of the element.  Multiple measurements of small spots on a sample may exhibit widely varying results.  To 
obtain  a  test  result  representative  of  the  overall  composition  of  SRM 2859,  the  user  must  make  measurements  of 
different locations until the mean of the measurements and the standard deviation no longer change. 
 
CAUTION TO USERS 
 
When 
Polyvinyl chloride is damaged by exposure to X-rays of  sufficient power density  for a sufficient duration.  When 
radiation damage is suspected, do not make repeat measurements of the same location of a specimen.  Both microbeam 
XRF and high-power wavelength dispersive XRF spectrometers use direct excitation and cause sufficient damage to 
alter the composition of the PVC.  An energy dispersive XRF spectrometer of the secondary target design may not 
damage the PVC.  Damage from irradiation is characterized by discoloration of the PVC that may be accompanied by 
a faint odor of burned material.  Sample mass loss may be observed.  Excessive irradiation was observed to cause loss 
of Cl and Hg from SRM 2859 as well as reduction of the hexavalent Cr originally added as Na2Cr2O7 prior to extrusion.  
Losses of Cl and Hg can be observed as decreasing X-ray count rates from repeat measurements.  Increasing count 
rates for Ca were observed when Cl was lost.   
 
ADDITIONAL CONSTITUENTS:  Noncertified values are provided for the following additional constituents in 
SRM 2859. 
 
Reference Mass Fraction Values:  A reference value is a noncertified value that is the present best estimate of the 
true value based on available data; however, the value does not meet the NIST criteria for certification and is provided 
with  associated  uncertainties  that  may  reflect  only  measurement  repeatability,  may  not  include  all  sources  of 
uncertainty, or may reflect a lack of sufficient statistical agreement among multiple analytical methods [2]. 
 
A reference value for bromine in SRM 2859 is reported in Table 2 as the mass fraction of total Br in the PVC matrix.  
The reference value for Br in SRM 2859 was determined at NIST using XRF.  The reference value is metrologically 
traceable to the SI derived unit of mass fraction (expressed as percent).  The associated uncertainty is calculated as 
U = kuc where uc is the combined standard uncertainty for the XRF test method, and the coverage factor, k = 2, was 
determined  from  the  Student's  t-distribution  corresponding  to  the  95 %  confidence  level  and  to  (n – 1) degrees  of 
freedom, where n = 64 is the number of determinations on which the mean value is based. 
 
A reference value for hexavalent chromium in SRM 2859 is reported in Table 2 as a mass fraction of Cr+6 species in 
the  PVC  matrix.    The  reference  value  for  hexavalent  Cr  in  SRM 2859  was  determined  using  laboratory-based, 
high-resolution  XRF [6].    The  reference  value  is  metrologically  traceable  to  the  amount  of  Cr+6  species  in 
ry  region
commercially-available, high-purity Na2Cr2O7 through measurements of the fluorescent X-rays in the energy region 
5395 eV  to  5435 eV  attributable  to  atoms  in  the  Cr+6  oxidation  state.    The  associated  uncertainty  is  calculated  as 
U = kuc, where uc is the combined standard uncertainty for the XRF test method, and the coverage factor was chosen 
as k = 2 to approximate a 95 % confidence level. 

 
o
l
C

 

SRM 2859 

Page 2 of 4 

Table 2.  Reference Mass Fraction Value for SRM 2859 Restricted Elements in Polyvinyl Chloride 

Value  for  SRM 

Constituent 

Mass Fraction 
(%) 

Expanded Uncertainty 
(%) 

Bromine (Br) 
Hexavalent Chromium (Cr+6) 

0.0854 
0.0480 

0.0015 
0.0066 

 
 
Information Mass Fraction Values:  Information values for constituents in SRM 2859 are reported as mass fractions 
in Table 3.  An information value is a value that may be of interest to the SRM user, but insufficient information is 
available  to  assess  the  uncertainty  associated  with  the  value [2].    Information  values  cannot  be  used  to  establish 
metrological traceability.  The information  values reported for Cl, Cu and Na  were determined  using a single test 
method  at  one  laboratory:    Cl  by  XRF;  Cu  and  Na  by  inductively  coupled  plasma  optical  emission 
spectrometry (ICPOES).  The values listed  for As, Ba, Sb, and Se are the estimated limits of detection of the test 
methods.  These four elements were not added intentionally to this PVC formulation. 
 
 

Table 3.  Information Mass Fraction Values for SRM 2859 Restricted Elements in Polyvinyl Chloride 

 

 

Constituent 

Antimony (Sb) 
Arsenic (As) 
Barium (Ba) 
Chlorine (Cl) 
Copper (Cu) 
Selenium (Se) 
Sodium (Na) 

Mass Fraction 
(%) 
 
<0.001 
<0.001 
<0.001 
33 
0.0054 
<0.001 
0.037 

 
 
ANALYSIS  ?
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
The material for SRM 2859 was prepared by combining a master blend with a dry blend in a mixer at 85 ºC, followed 
by  extrusion  at  175 ºC,  cooling  in  a  water  bath,  and  chopping,  then  a  second  extrusion,  cooling,  and  chopping.  
Blending and extrusion were performed by Polymers Center of Excellence (Charlotte, NC).  The master blend was 
prepared from virgin PVC powder to which organometallic compounds of Ba, Cd, Hg, and Pb, an aqueous solution 
of Na2Cr2O7 (containing a surfactant), and a copper phthalocyanine bromide dye were added.  The dry blend consisted 
of PVC with added CaCO3 and methyltin mercaptide.  The approximate density of SRM 2859 is 1.3 g/cm3.  The PVC 
pellets were blended and bottled at NIST. 
 
Homogeneity testing was performed at NIST using XRF to measure disks made from 6.2 g of pellets melt-pressed at 
175 ºC.  Additional evaluation of heterogeneity was performed using microXRF at NIST.  Material heterogeneity was 
sufficiently low for value assignment.  Quantitative determinations were done at NIST by XRF after melt pressing 
and  at  collaborating  laboratories  by  ICPOES  after  cryogenic  grinding  and  microwave-assisted  acid  digestion.  
Calibrations for all constituents, except Br and Cl, were created using NIST SRM 3100 series spectrometric solutions.  
Bromine by XRF was calibrated using high-purity NaBr, and Cl was calibrated using commercial reference materials 
for PVC. 
 
Each certified value is a weighted mean of the results from the three methods [3].  The uncertainty listed with each 
certified value is an expanded uncertainty about the mean [4], with coverage factor, k = 2, calculated following the 
ISO/JCGM Guide [5].   
 

 

                                                           

(1)  Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
SRM 2859 

Page 3 of 4 

Analyses leading to the certification of this SRM were performed at NIST by J.R. Sieber, J.L. Molloy, C. Bibb, and 
M. Boyce  of  the  NIST  Chemical  Sciences  Division.    Analytical  determinations  were  also  performed  by  D. Cobb, 
U.S. Consumer  Product  Safety  Commission (CPSC)  (Rockville, MD);  C.S. Helt  and  K. Leung,  Underwriters 
Laboratories (Melville, NY); and E.P. Jahrman and G.T. Seidler, University of Washington (Seattle, WA). 
 
 
NOTICE TO USERS 
 
NIST strives to maintain the SRM inventory supply, but NIST cannot guarantee the continued or continuous supply 
of any specific SRM.  Accordingly, NIST encourages the use of this SRM as a primary benchmark for the quality and 
accuracy  of  the  user’s  in-house  reference  materials  and  working  standards.    As  such,  the  SRM  should  be  used  to 
validate the more routinely used reference materials in a laboratory.  Comparisons between the SRM and in-house 
reference materials or working measurement standards should take place at intervals appropriate to the conservation 
of  the  SRM  and  the  stability  of  relevant  in-house  materials.    For  further  guidance  on  how  this  approach  can  be 
implemented, contact NIST by email at srms@nist.gov. 
 
 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Thompson, A.;  Taylor, B.N.;  Guide  for  the  Use  of  the  International  System  of  Units (SI);  NIST  Special 
rial 
at 

Printing  Office:  Washington, DC 

Publication 811;  U.S.  Government 
https://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/sp811/index.cfm (accessed Mar 2019). 

available 

(2008); 

[2]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of 
Reference Materials for Chemical Measurements; NIST Special Publication 260-136 U.S. Government Printing 
Office:  Washington, DC  (2000);  available  at  https://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF  (accessed 
Mar 2019). 

[3]  DerSimonian, R.  and  Laird, N.;  Meta-analysis  in  Clinical  Trials;  Control  Clin.  Trials,  Vol. 7,  pp. 177–188 

(1986). 

[4]  Horn, R.A.;  Horn, S.A.;  Duncan, D.B.;  Estimating  Heteroscedastic  Variance  in  Linear  Models;  J.  Am.  Stat. 

[5] 

[6] 

Assoc., Vol. 70, pp. 380–385 (1975). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data - Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement; 
(GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections), Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (JCGM) (2008); available at 
https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Mar 2019);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
https://www.nist.gov/pml/nist-technical-note-1297 (accessed Mar 2019). 
Jahrman, E.P.; Seidler, G.T.; Sieber, J.R.; Determination of Hexavalent Chromium Fractions in Plastics Using 
Laboratory-Based, High-Resolution X-ray Emission Spectroscopy; Anal. Chem., Vol. 90, pp. 6587-6593 (2018). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
Certificate Revision History:  21 March 2019 (Added reference value for hexavalent Cr mass fraction; editorial changes); 10 August 2017 
(Original certificate date). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This  can  be 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
fax  (301) 948-3730;  e-mail 
accomplished  by  contacting 
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 

telephone  (301) 975-2200; 

their  possession  is  current. 

the  SRM  Program: 

's:-//www.nist.gov/srm

SRM 2859 

Page 4 of 4 

