National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 2890 

Water Saturated 1-Octanol 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  validating  methods  and  calibrating 
instruments for the measurement of trace concentration levels of water.  SRM 2890 is a solution of water saturated 
1-octanol  which  is  certified  for  its  water  content.    A  unit  of  SRM  2890  consists  of  five  5  mL  ampoules,  each 
containing approximately 2 mL of water saturated 1-octanol. 
 

Certified Concentration (mass fraction) of Water Content 

value 

47.3  ±  1.0 mg/g 
39.24  ±  0.85 mg/mL(a) 

 
 
 
 
(a)  A density of 0.82930 g/mL at 21.5 °C ± 0.5 °C was used in the conversion between mass fraction (mg/g) and mass concentration (mg/mL).  
 
he  equally  weighted 
The measurand is the water content in SRM 2890.  The certified value of the water content is the equally weighted 
mean of the  means of the results obtained  from:  (1) coulometric Karl  Fischer  measurements performed at NIST, 
(2)  volumetric  Karl  Fischer  measurements  performed  at  NIST,  and  (3)  an  interlaboratory  comparison  exercise 
involving 15 collaborating laboratories.  The expanded uncertainty in the certified value is equal to U = kuc where uc 
is the combined standard uncertainty calculated according to the ISO/JCGM and NIST Guides [1] and k is the coverage 
factor.  The value of uc is intended to represent at the level of one standard deviation the combined effect of all the 
uncertainties in the certified value.  Here uc accounts for within-method and between-method variations.  The effective 
degrees of freedom can be considered infinite; therefore the coverage factor, k = 2, is a value for a 95 % confidence 
interval based on a normal distribution.  The certified value is metrologically traceable to the SI unit of mass, expressed 
as milligrams per gram. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2890 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until 30 June 2022, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with instructions given in this certificate 
(see “Notice and Warning to Users”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise 
aated,  or  otherwise 
modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate this notification. 
 
Preparation  and  analytical  measurements  were  performed  by  and  L.T.  Sniegoski  of  the  NIST  Chemical 
Sciences Division and S.A. Margolis formerly of NIST. 
 
“hemical  Sciences 
Coordination of the technical measurements was under the direction of S.A. Wise of the NIST Chemical Sciences 
Division and S.A. Margolis. 
 
Statistical consultation was provided by M.S. Levenson formerly of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  02 July 2015 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

direction  of  S.A. 

M.S.

 

Page 1 of 3 

  

SRM 2890 

NOTICE AND WARNING TO USERS 
 
Storage, Handling and Use:  The ampoules are sealed under dry nitrogen and should be stored between 10 °C and 
30 °C.  After opening an ampoule, caution should be taken not to contaminate the sample.  For the certified value to 
be valid within the stated uncertainty, samples should be withdrawn from the ampoule into a dry syringe. 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS 
 
Preparation of SRM 2890:  1-Octanol (CAS Number 111-87-5), as supplied by the manufacturer, was stirred over 
distilled water for 24 h at room temperature (21.5 °C ± 0.5 °C).  The octanol-water suspension was allowed to stand 
and separate for three days.  The water saturated octanol (upper layer) was decanted into a second bottle and then 
dispensed in 2.2 mL aliquots into washed and dried, nitrogen filled ampoules and flame sealed. 
 
Analytical Methods:  At NIST two groups of 20 ampoules each were selected from the fill sequence of ampoules by 
random stratified sampling.  One group of ampoules was analyzed by the coulometric Karl Fischer method and the 
other group of ampoules was analyzed by the volumetric Karl Fischer method; each group of ampoules was analyzed 
in a random order over four days.  The Karl Fischer instruments were calibrated with a series of five standards prepared 
by the gravimetric addition of increasing amounts of water to dry octanol.  The Karl Fischer instruments were also 
evaluated for systematic biases as described previously [2,3]. 
 
An  interlaboratory  comparison  exercise  among  15  laboratories  and  NIST  was  conducted  to  determine  the  water 
content of SRM 2890.  All analyses in the interlaboratory comparison exercise were performed using the coulometric 
Karl Fischer methods and the reagents routinely used in the participating laboratories.  In addition, one laboratory 
measured  the  water  content  by  using  a  head-space/gas  chromatography  method.    Each  laboratory  analyzed  two 
subsamples from each of two ampoules of SRM 2890.  The participating laboratories are listed below. 
 
All Karl Fischer measurements at NIST were performed on a volume basis and the results converted to a mass basis 
using the density of the solution.  The density of SRM 2890 was determined to be 0.82930 g/mL (standard deviation 
of 0.00049 g/mL, based on six measurements) at 21.5 °C ± 0.5 °C.  Evaluation of the effect of temperature on the 
saturation of the 1-octanol indicated that the water content between 10 °C and 30 °C varied less than 5 % from the value 
at room temperature (21.5 °C ± 0.5 °C). 
  
Homogeneity Study:  Samples from 10 ampoules, selected throughout the fill sequence, were measured in duplicate 
at  NIST  in  a  random  order  within  a  single  day.    No  statistically  significant  variation  in  the  moisture  content  was 
detected with fill sequence.  
 
Analysts and Laboratories Participating in the Interlaboratory Comparison Exercise:  
 
P. Griffin; Doble Engineering Co., Watertown, MA 
J. Lloyd; United Power Services, Nashville, TN 
G. Gauger; Cooper Power Systems, Franksville, WI 
G. Thomas; Big Rivers Electric Corp., Henderson, KY 
C. Smith; Cosa Instrument Co., Norwood, NJ 
F. Mees; UMM Electronics, Indianapolis, IN 
J. Sans; S D Meyers, Tallmadge, OH 
M. Anderson; Bonneville Power Administration, Vancouver, WA 
C. Claiborne; ABB Power T&D Co. Inc., Raleigh, NC 
F. Koch; Brinkmann Instruments Inc., Westbury, NY 
T. Zazulak; Boston Edison, Boston, MA 
G. Humphry; JOAP TSC, Pensacola, FL 
T. Shull; Robert Becker Laboratories, Patuxent River, MD 
W. Zdrojewski; Mid-Atlantic Regional Materials Test Laboratory, Norfolk, VA 
J. Jalbert; Institute de recherche de Hydro-Quebec, Variance, Quebec, Canada 

SRM 2890 

Page 2 of 3 

REFERENCES 

 
 
[1] 

JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data - Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement; 
(GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections), Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (JCGM) (2008); available at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf (accessed July 2015); see also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results; NIST Technical Note 1297, U.S. Government Printing Office:  Washington, DC (1994); available at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed July 2015). 

[2]  Margolis, S.A.; Sources of Systematic Bias in  the Measurement of  Water by the  Coulometric and Volumetric 

Karl Fischer Methods; Anal. Chem., Vol. 23, pp. 4864−4871 (1997). 

[3]  Margolis, S.A.; Systematic Errors in the Measurement of Moisture by Karl Fischer Methods; Third Intl. Symp. 

on Humidity and Moisture, Vol. 2, pp. 133−140, National Physics Laboratory, Teddington, UK (1998). 

Vol. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Certificate Revision History:  02 July 2015 (Change of expiration date; editorial changes); 31 July 2008 (Update of expiration date; editorial 
changes); 25 August 1998 (Original certificate date). 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is  current.  This  can  be  accomplished
Users of this SRM should ensure that the Certificate of Analysis in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished 
by contacting the SRM Program:  telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the 
Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 2890 

Page 3 of 3 

