National Institute of Standards and Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material 2895 

 

 
Ethanol-Water Solution (Nominal Mass Fraction 0.2 %) 
 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is a solution of ethanol (ethyl alcohol:  Chemical Abstracts Service [CAS] 
Registry Number 64-17-5) in water at a nominal concentration of 0.2 % by mass.  SRM 2895 is intended primarily 
for  use  in  the  calibration  of  instruments  and  techniques  used for the determination of ethanol in blood.  A unit of 
SRM 2895 consists of five 2-mL ampoules, each containing approximately 1.2 mL of solution. 
 
s  fraction  value  given  below  is  based  on  results  obtained 
Certified Mass Fraction of Ethanol:  The certified mass fraction value given below is based on results obtained 
from the gravimetric preparation of the solution and from the analytical results determined using gas chromatography 
and titrimetry.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy in that all 
known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or accounted for by NIST [1]. 
 

Mass  Fraction  Value:  0.1701 
Ethanol Certified Mass Fraction Value:  0.1701 %  ±  0.0014 %  

4 

 
The results are expressed as the certified value ± the expanded uncertainty.  Certified values are unweighted means 
of concentrations determined by gravimetric preparation and chromatographic and titrimetric measurements [2].  The 
uncertainty listed with each value is an expanded uncertainty about the mean, with coverage factor 2 (approximately 
95 % confidence), calculated by combining a between-source variance incorporating inter-method bias with a pooled 
within-source variance following the ISO/NIST Guides [3].  The uncertainty includes both correction for estimated 
purity  and  allowance  for  differences  among  the  concentrations  determined  by  gravimetric  preparation  and 
chromatographic and titrimetric measurements. 
 
uncertainty 
Expiration  of  Certification:    The  certification  of  this  SRM 2895  is  valid,  within  the  measurement  uncertainty 
specified, until 30 April 2023, provided the SRM is handled, and stored in accordance with the instructions given in 
this certificate (see “Instructions for Handling, Storage, and Use”).  However, the certification is nullified if the SRM 
is damaged, contaminated, or modified. 
 
If 
Maintenance  of  SRM  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If 
substantive  technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will 
notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
The coordination of the technical measurements leading to the certification of this SRM was under the direction of 
Division. 
M.M. Schantz and S.A. Wise of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Consultation  on  the  statistical  design  of  the  experimental  work  and  evaluation  of  the  data  were  provided  by 
S.D. Leigh of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Partial funding support for the preparation and certification of this Standard Reference Material was provided by the 
National Institute of Justice (NIJ) and managed through the NIST Office of Law Enforcement Standards (OLES). 
 
 
 
 

tification. 

Carlos A Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 
 
Robert L Watters, Jr., Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Page 1 of 3 

Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
13
Certificate Issue Date:  11 April 2013 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

  

SRM 2895 

ed  in  the  dark  at  temperatures  between  10

Preparation of and analytical measurements on the SRM were performed by J.V. Goodpaster and M.M. Schantz of 
the NIST Chemical Sciences Division and M.P. Cronise and C.N. Fales of the NIST Office of Reference Materials.  
Additional analytical measurements were performed by M. Archer of the National Metrology Laboratory, Pretoria, 
South Africa and L.G. Mackay and D.G. Burke of the National Analytical Reference Laboratory, Sydney, Australia. 
 
fice  of  Reference 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
USE 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING STORAGE, AND USE 
 
Handling: The solution contains ethanol in water at the stated concentration.  Use proper disposal methods. 
 
Storage:  Sealed ampoules, as received, should be stored in the dark at temperatures between 10 °C and 30 °C. 
 
Use:    Sample  aliquots  for  analysis  should  be  withdrawn  immediately  after  opening  the  ampoules  and  should  be 
processed without delay for the certified concentration value to be valid within the stated uncertainty. Because of the 
volatility  of  ethanol,  the  certified  concentration  value  is  NOT  applicable  to  material  stored  in  ampoules  that  have 
been opened for more than 2 min, even if they are resealed. 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
The solution was prepared at NIST by weighing and mixing known masses of ethanol and organic-free water.  The 
solution  was  mixed  overnight  (a  minimum  of  16 h).    The  total  mass  of  the  solution  was  measured,  and  the 
concentration was calculated from this gravimetric procedure.  The gravimetric concentration was adjusted for the 
purity  estimation  of  the  ethanol,  which  was  determined  using  gas  chromatography  with  flame  ionization  detection 
(GC-FID)  with  two  stationary  phases  of  different  polarities,  differential  scanning  calorimetry,  and  Karl  Fischer 
analysis  for  water  content.    The  bulk  solution  was  chilled  slightly,  and  1.2 mL  aliquots  were  dispensed  into 
2-mL amber glass ampoules, which were then flame sealed. 
 
Aliquots  from  nine  ampoules,  selected  using  a  random  stratified  sampling  scheme,  were  analyzed  in  duplicate  by 
using  capillary  gas  chromatography  with  flame  ionization  detection  on  a  relatively  polar  DB-wax  column, 
15 m × 0.45 mm id, 0.85 µm film thickness (Agilent Technologies, Wilmington, DE, USA).  The internal standard 
added  to  each  sample  for  quantification  purposes  was  1-propanol.    Calibration  solutions  consisting  of  weighed 
amounts of ethanol and the internal standard compound in organic-free water were chromatographically analyzed to 
determine analyte response factors. 
 
In addition, the concentration of the solution was determined at the National Metrology Laboratory (Pretoria, South 
Africa) using titrimetry.  The ethanol in known masses of the solutions was oxidized to acetic acid using a known 
mass  of  standard  potassium  dichromate  solution  in  the  presence  of  sulfuric  acid.    The  quantity  of  ethanol  in  the 
solution  was  determined  from  the  quantity  of  unreacted  potassium  dichromate  in  the  solution.    To  determine  the 
quantity of unreacted potassium dichromate, potassium iodide was added to the oxidized mixture, and the liberated 
iodine was titrated with a sodium thiosulfate solution.  Eight titrations were done for this solution. 
 
The  concentration  of  this  solution  was  also  determined  at  the  National  Analytical  Reference  Laboratory  (Sydney, 
Australia)  using  an  exact  matching  isotope  dilution-gas chromatographic/mass spectrometric (ID-GC/MS) method.  
The  ID-GC/MS  method  utilized  carbon-13  labeled  ethanol  and  GC/MS  analysis  with  a  Chrompack  porous  layer 
PoraPlot  Q column,  27.5 m × 0.32 mm id  (Varian,  Mulgrave,  Victoria,  Australia)(1).    Duplicate  samples  from  six 
ampoules were analyzed using the ID-GC/MS method. 

                                                           

1Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this certificate in order to specify adequately 
the  experimental  procedure.    Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  National  Institute  of 
Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the 
purpose. 
 
SRM 2895 

Page 2 of 3 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment 
of  Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136;  U.S.  Government 
Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (2000);  available  at  http://www.nist.gov/srm/publications.cfm  (accessed 
Apr 2013) 

[3] 

[2]  Levenson, M.S.; Banks, D.L.; Eberhardt, K.R.; Gill, L.M.; Guthrie, W.F.; Liu, H.K.; Vangel, M.G.; Yen, J.H.; 
Zhang,  N.F.;  An  Approach  to  Combining  Results  from  Multiple  Methods  Motivated  by  the  ISO  GUM; 
J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., Vol. 105, pp. 571-579 (2000). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(ISO  GUM  1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Apr 2013);  see  also 
Taylor,  B.N.;  Kuyatt,  C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note  1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994); available at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed Apr 2013). 

  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certificate Revision History:  11 April 2013 (Extended certification period; editorial changes); 26 March 2004 (Original certificate date) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This  can  be 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.  This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program:    telephone  (301)  975-2200;  fax  (301)  948-3730;  e-mail 
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

€

» 

SRM 2895 

Page 3 of 3 

