National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 3000 

 

 

0.0103 g/g  ±  0.0004 g/g 

Benzene (mass fraction):   

Benzene in Methanol 
 
(Nominal Mass Fraction – 0.01 g/g) 
 
This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  a  gravimetrically  prepared  single-compound  solution  (benzene)  in 
methanol  intended  primarily  for  the  calibration  of  instrumentation  and  validation  of  methods  for  volatile  organic 
compound  (VOC)  determinations.    Because  of  its  miscibility  with  water,  this  SRM  can  also  be  used  to  fortify 
aqueous samples with known amounts of the VOC.  One unit of SRM 3000 consists of two 5 mL sealed borosilicate 
glass ampoules of a gravimetrically prepared solution of benzene in methanol. Approximately 2.5 mL of this SRM 
mixture is supplied in each 5 mL glass ampoule. 
 
Certified Value:   The certified concentration value [1] for benzene, reported as a mass fraction, is given below. 
 
 
 
A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy in that all known or 
suspected  sources  of  bias  have  been  investigated  or  taken  into account [1].  The certified value is an unweighted 
mean  of  the  results  from  three  analytical  methods.    The  uncertainty  listed  with  each  value  is  an  expanded 
uncertainty  about  the  mean,  with  coverage  factor  2  (approximately  95  %  confidence),  calculated  by  combining  a 
between-method variance [2] with a pooled, within-method variance following the ISO and NIST Guides [3]. 
 
Reference  Value:    A  NIST  reference  value  is  a  non-certified  value  that  is  the  best  estimate  of  the  true  value; 
however, the value does not meet NIST criteria for certification and is provided with an associated uncertainty that 
may reflect only measurement precision and may not include all sources of uncertainty [1].  A reference value for 
density is provided for the calculation of volume to assist in the transfer of material during gravimetric dilutions of 
the SRM. 
 
 
The  reference  value  is  the  mean  of  results  obtained  by  NIST  using  one  analytical  technique.    The  expanded 
uncertainty, U, is calculated as U = kuc, where uc is one standard deviation of the analyte mean, and the coverage 
factor, k, is determined from the Students t-distribution corresponding to the associated degrees of freedom and 95 
% confidence level [3]. 
 
Information  Value:    An  information  value  is  considered  to  be  a  value  that  will  be  of  use  to  the  SRM  user,  but 
insufficient information is available to assess the uncertainty associated with the value or only a limited number of 
analyses  were  performed  [1].    An  information  value  for  a  selected  impurity,  based  on  supplementary  analytical 
results obtained during the course of certification of this SRM, is provided below.  This noncertified value is given 
for  informational  purposes  only  with  no  uncertainty  reported,  as  there  is  insufficient  information  to  make  an 
assessment of the uncertainty. 

Density of the SRM Solution at 22 °C:   0.79047 g/mL  ±  0.00001 g/mL  

Toluene (mass fraction):  1.1 × 10 -6 g/g 

 

 
Expiration  of  Certification:    The  certification  of  this  SRM  is  valid,  within  the  measurement  uncertainties 
specified,  until  31  January  2015,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this 
certificate  (see  “Instructions  for  Use”).    This  certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is  damaged,  contaminated,  or 
otherwise modified. 
 
The overall coordination and direction of the technical work required for this SRM certification were performed by 
F.R. Guenther and M.M. Schantz of the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division. 

 
Gaithersburg, MD  20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  16 November 2009 
See Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Stephen A Wise, Chief 
Analytical Chemistry Division 
Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

SRM 3000 

Page 1 of 3 

. 
The  analytical  measurements  leading  to  the  certification  of  this  SRM  were  performed  by  B.A.  Benner,  Jr., 
T.L. Green,  F.R. Guenther,  C.R. Mack,  B.J.  Porter,  M.M.  Schantz,  and  S-k.  Wong  of  the  NIST  Analytical 
Chemistry Division. 
 
Statistical consultation was provided by S.D. Leigh of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Partial  support  for  the  preparation  and  certification  of  this  Standard  Reference  Material  was  provided  by  the 
U.S. Environmental  Protection  Agency  Office  of  Water,  Office  of  Enforcement  and  Compliance  Assurance,  and 
Office of Research and Development. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the NIST Measurement Services 
Division. 
 
Maintenance  of  SRM  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If 
substantive changes occur that affect the certification before the expiration of this certificate, NIST will notify the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
SRM Preparation:  This SRM was prepared by NIST using precise gravimetric mass determinations.  Chemicals 
used  in  the  preparation  were  received  from  commercial  sources  and  were  assessed  for  purity  at  NIST  using 
differential  scanning  calorimetry  (DSC),  gas  chromatography  with  flame  ionization  detection  (GC/FID),  and  gas 
chromatography with mass spectrometric detection (GC/MS). 
 
Benzene  Concentration  Value  Assignment:    The  certified  value  for  benzene  is  based  on  the  gravimetric 
preparation  of  the  SRM  and  analysis  by  two  GC/MS  methods  of  randomly  selected  ampoules  from  the  lot.    The 
analytical methods were calibrated using four calibration standards independently prepared by gravimetry. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 
 
Storage:  Sealed ampoules should be stored in the dark at temperatures between 10 °C and 30 °C. 
 
Opening  of  Ampoule:    Open  ampoules  carefully  to  prevent  contamination  and  injury.    The  ampoules  are 
pre-scored  and  should  not  be  opened  using  a  file.    It  is  recommended that aliquots be withdrawn at temperatures 
between  20 °C  and  25  °C.    Each  ampouled  solution  must  be  opened  in  a  clean,  dry  environment  and  processed 
without delay.  Each ampouled solution of the SRM is intended for use immediately after opening and may not be 
reused, even if resealed. 
 
Preparation of Working Standard Solutions by Mass:  Great care must be used in handling this SRM.  Dilution 
of this SRM should be made gravimetrically (weighed) and not by volumetric means.  (Volume may be calculated 
for  transfer  purposes  only.)    It  is  recommended  that  the  SRM  material  be  transferred  in  a  gas-tight  syringe  to  a 
septum-sealed container containing the diluent.  It is critical that the SRM be injected slowly beneath the surface of 
the diluent.  The syringe should be weighed before injecting the material and weighed again after solution transfer.  
This allows subtraction of the mass of the syringe and any SRM material that remains in the syringe.  The amount of 
benzene added to the diluent can then be determined from the mass added and the certified value.  

SRM 3000 

Page 2 of 3 

. 

REFERENCES 

[2] 

 
[1]  May, W.; Parris, R.; Beck, C.; Fassett, J.; Greenberg, R.; Guenther, F.; Kramer, G.; Wise, S.; Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-
Assignment of Reference Materials for Chemical Measurements; NIST Special Publication 260-136, U.S. 
Government Printing Office:  Washington, DC (2000); available at 
http://ts.nist.gov/MeasurementServices/ReferenceMaterials/upload/SP260-136.PDF. 
Levenson,  M.S.,  Banks,  D.L.,  Eberhardt,  K.R.,  Gill,  L.M.,  Guthrie,  W.F.,  Liu,  H.K.,  Vangel,  M.G.,  Yen, 
J.H., and Zhang, N.F., “An Approach to Combining Results from Multiple Methods Motivated by the ISO 
GUM,” J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. 105, pp. 571-579, (2000). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data − Guide to the Expression of in Measurement (ISO GUM 
1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides 
in  Metrology  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf; see also Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, 
C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement  Results;  NIST 
Technical  Note  1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington,  DC  (1994);  available  at 
http://physics.nist.gov/Pubs/. 

[3] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certificate  Revision  History:    16  November  2009  (Extended  certificate  expiration  date,  updated  certified  value,  editorial  changes);  
13 July 2005 (This technical revision reports an extension in the certificated period); 15 June 2001 (Original certificate date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  certificate in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished by 
contacting the SRM Program at:  telephone (301) 975-2200 fax (301) 926-4751; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via 
the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 3000 

Page 3 of 3 

