National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 3016 

 

 

sec-Butylbenzene in Methanol 
 
(Nominal Mass Fraction – 0.01 g/g) 
 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended primarily for the calibration of instrumentation and validation 
of methods for volatile organic compound (VOC) determinations.  Because of its miscibility with water, this SRM 
can also be used to fortify aqueous samples with known amounts of the VOC.  A unit of SRM 3016 consists of two 5 
mL  sealed  borosilicate  glass  ampoules  of  a  gravimetrically  prepared  single  compound  solution  in  methanol.  
Approximately 2.5 mL of this SRM mixture is supplied in each 5 mL glass ampoule.  
 
Certified Value:  The certified concentration value [1] for sec-butylbenzene, reported as a mass fraction, is given 
below. 
 
 
 
A  NIST  certified  value  is  a  value  for  which  NIST  has  the highest  confidence  in  its  accuracy  in  that  all  known  or 
suspected  sources  of  bias  have  been  investigated  or  taken  into  account  [1].    The  certified  value  is  an  unweighted 
mean of the results from three analytical methods.  The uncertainty listed with each value is an expanded uncertainty 
about  the  mean,  with  coverage  factor  2  (approximately  95  %  confidence),  calculated  by  combining  a  between-
method variance [2] with a pooled, within-method variance following the ISO and NIST Guides [3]. 
 
Reference  Value:    A  NIST  reference  value  is  a  non-certified  value  that  is  the  best  estimate  of  the  true  value; 
however, the value does not meet NIST criteria for certification and is provided with an associated uncertainty that 
may reflect only measurement precision and may not include all sources of uncertainty.  A reference value [1] for 
density is provided for the calculation of volume to assist in the transfer of material during gravimetric dilutions of 
the SRM. 
 

sec-Butylbenzene (mass fraction):   

0.0101 g/g    0.0002 g/g 

Density of the SRM Solution at 22 °C:  0.79082 g/mL    0.00022 g/mL  

 

 

 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 3016 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until 31 January 2015, provided the SRM is handled in accordance with the instructions given in this certificate (see 
“Instructions for Use”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance  of  SRM  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If 
substantive  technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will 
notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
The overall coordination and direction of the technical work required for this SRM certification were performed by 
F.R. Guenther and M.M. Schantz of the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division. 
 
The analytical measurements leading to the certification of this SRM were performed by T.L. Green, F.R. Guenther, 
C.R.  Mack,  B.A.  Benner,  Jr,  M.M.  Schantz,  B.J.  Porter,  and  Siu-kay  Wong  of  the  NIST  Analytical  Chemistry 
Division. 

 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  17 December 2009 
See Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

 
Stephen A. Wise, Chief 
Analytical Chemistry Division 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

SRM 3016 

Page 1 of 3 

 
Partial  support  for  the  preparation  and  certification  of  this  Standard  Reference  Material  was  provided  by  the  U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency Office of Water, Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance, and Office of 
Research and Development. 
 
Statistical consultation was provided by S.D. Leigh of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Measurement  Services 
Division. 
 
SRM Preparation:  This SRM was prepared by NIST using precise gravimetric mass determinations.  Chemicals 
used  in  the  preparation  were  received  from  commercial  sources  and  were  assessed  for  purity  at  NIST  using 
differential  scanning  calorimetry  (DSC),  gas  chromatography  with  flame  ionization  detection  (GC/FID),  and  gas 
chromatography with mass selective detection (GC/MSD). 
 
sec-Butylbenzene  Concentration  Value  Assignment:    The  certified  value  for  sec-butylbenzene  is  based  on 
gravimetric preparation of the SRM and analysis by GC/FID and GC/MSD of randomly selected ampoules from the 
lot.  The analytical method was calibrated using four calibration standards independently prepared by gravimetry. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 
 
Storage:  Sealed ampoules should be stored in the dark at temperatures between 10 °C and 30 °C. 
 
Opening of Ampoule:  Open ampoules carefully to prevent contamination and injury.  The ampoules are pre-scored 
and should not be opened using a file.  It is recommended that aliquots be withdrawn at temperatures between 20 °C 
and 25 °C.  Each ampouled solution must be opened in a clean, dry environment and processed without delay.  Each 
ampouled  solution  of  the  SRM  is  intended  for  use  immediately  after  opening  and  may  not  be  reused,  even  if 
resealed. 
 
Preparation of Working Standard Solutions by Mass:  Great care must be used in handling this SRM.  Dilution 
of this SRM should be made gravimetrically (weighed) and not by volumetric means (volume may be calculated for 
transfer purposes only).  It is recommended that the SRM material be transferred in a gas-tight syringe to a septum 
sealed  container  containing  the  diluent.    It  is  critical  that  the  SRM  be  injected  slowly  beneath  the  surface  of  the 
diluent.  The syringe should be weighed before injecting the material and weighed again after solution transfer.  This 
allows  subtraction  of  the  mass  of  the  syringe  and  any  SRM  material  that  remains  in  the  syringe.    The  amount  of 
sec-butylbenzene added to the diluent can be determined from the mass added and the certified value.  

SRM 3016 

Page 2 of 3 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  May, W.; Parris, R.; Beck, C.; Fassett, J.; Greenberg, R.; Guenther, F.; Kramer, G.; Wise, S.; Gills, T.; 

[2] 

[3] 

Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment 
of Reference Materials for Chemical Measurements; NIST Special Publication 260-136, U.S. Government 
Printing Office:  Washington, DC (2000); available at 
http://ts.nist.gov/MeasurementServices/ReferenceMaterials/upload/SP260-136.PDF. 
Levenson, M.S., Banks, D.L., Eberhardt, K.R., Gill, L.M., Guthrie, W.F., Liu, H-k., Vangel, M.G., Yen, J.H., 
and Zhang, N.F., “An Approach to Combining Results from Multiple Methods Motivated by the ISO GUM,” 
J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. 105, pp. 571-579, (2000). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data  Guide to the Expression of in Measurement (ISO GUM 
1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides 
in  Metrology  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf;  see  also  Taylor,  B.N.;  Kuyatt, 
C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement  Results;  NIST 
Technical  Note  1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington,  DC  (1994);  available  at 
http://physics.nist.gov/Pubs/. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certificate  Revision  History:    17  December  2009  (This  technical  revision  reports  an  extension  in  the  certification  period);  12  January  2006 
(This technical revision reflects an extension in the expiration date); 24 October 2001 (Original certificate date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  certificate  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be  accomplished  by 
contacting the SRM Program at:  telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 926-4751; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via 
the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

 

SRM 3016 

Page 3 of 3 

