 

National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material 3037 
 
Arsenous Acid (AsIII) Standard Solution 
 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended for use as a primary calibration standard for the quantitative 
determination of the arsenic species arsenous acid (AsIII).  This SRM can be used for quality assurance when assigning 
values  to  in-house  control  materials.    A  unit  of  SRM 3037  consists  of  two  10 mL  sealed  borosilicate  glass  amber 
ampoules of an acidified aqueous solution prepared gravimetrically to contain a known mass fraction of arsenous acid.  
The  solution  contains  hydrochloric  acid  at  a  volume  fraction  of  approximately  1 %,  which  is  equivalent  to  a 
concentration (molarity) of approximately 0.12 mol/L.  Due to digestion of the starting material, arsenic trioxide, with 
sodium hydroxide, sodium is present in the ampoules at approximately 1000 mg/kg. 
 

Certified Mass Fraction Value of AsIII: 

Value  of  AsIII 

 

1.0442 mg/g  ±  0.0020 mg/g 

 
A NIST certified value [1] is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy in that all known or 
suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [2].  The expanded uncertainty is calculated as 
U = kuc, where uc is the combined uncertainty, at the level of one standard deviation, due to material variability and 
measurement uncertainty following the ISO/JCGM guide [3] and reference 4.  Analyses for value assignment were 
performed by NIST using gravimetric titrimetry.  The associated uncertainty is expressed at an approximately 95 % 
level of confidence with a coverage factor of k = 2.086.  The certified value is metrologically traceable to the derived 
SI unit for mass fraction, expressed as milligrams per gram. 
 
Information Mass Fraction Value:  The information value for the impurity arsenic acid, AsV, is listed in Table 1.  
This information value may be of interest to the SRM user [2] and is given to provide additional characterization of 
the material only.  The value should not be used for calibration or to monitor or assess analytical performance.  The 
information value cannot be used to establish metrological traceability. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 3037 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until 30 September 2027, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with the instructions given in this 
certificate (see  “Instructions  for  Storage  and  Use”).    The  certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is  damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
icate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination of the technical measurements leading to the certification of this SRM was performed by S.A. Rabb of 
the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
W.C
Analytical measurements at NIST were performed by W.C. Davis, K.W. Pratt, and L.L. Yu of the NIST Chemical 
Sciences Division. 
 
Statistical analysis was provided by N.A. Heckert of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  01 February 2018 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 
 
Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

of 

 

Page 1 of 3 

  

SRM 3037 

PREPARATIO 

NOTICE TO USERS:  SRM 3037 IS INTENDED FOR RESEARCH USE, NOT FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION. 
 
NIST strives to maintain the SRM inventory supply, but NIST cannot guarantee the continued or continuous supply 
of any specific SRM.  Accordingly, NIST encourages the use of this SRM as a primary benchmark for the quality and 
accuracy  of  the  user’s  in-house  reference  materials  and  working  standards.    As  such,  the  SRM  should  be  used  to 
validate the more routinely used reference materials in a laboratory.  Comparisons between the SRM and in-house 
reference materials or working measurement standards should take place at intervals appropriate to the conservation 
of  the  SRM  and  the  stability  of  relevant  in-house  materials.    For  further  guidance  on  how  this  approach  can  be 
implemented, contact NIST by email at srms@nist.gov. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage and Use:  The SRM is an acid solution contained in tip-sealed borosilicate glass ampoules with pre-scored 
stems.  Therefore, all appropriate safety precautions, including use of gloves during handling, should be taken.  Prior 
to opening, any liquid inside the tip of the ampoule should be drained, the area of the stem where the pre-scored band 
is located (≈ 5 mm below the encircling metallic band) should be wiped with a clean, damp cloth, and the body of the 
ampoule wrapped in absorbent material.  To open, hold the ampoule steady while grasping the stem at the metallic 
band with thumb and forefinger, and then snap off the stem by applying minimal thumb pressure.  The stem should 
break off easily and cleanly where pre-scored.  Using a metal file to break off the stem is NOT recommended.  Excess 
liquid or glass from the ampoule should be cleaned off before emptying contents into another container for further 
processing or storage.  Unopened ampoules should be stored at 21 °C ± 3 °C in an upright position inside the original 
container supplied by NIST. 
 
SOURCE AND PREPARATION(1) 
 
Source and  Preparation:  High purity arsenic trioxide was purchased from a commercial vendor to produce the 
SRM.  This material was dissolved at NIST using sodium hydroxide and then stabilized with hydrochloric acid to 
prevent oxidation of the AsIII to AsV.  Aliquots of the SRM were later dispensed into ampoules. 
 
ANALYSIS 
 
The certification of AsIII was based on the NIST gravimetric titrimetry primary method.  In addition, the impurity 
arsenic species were measured by ion chromatography-inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (IC-ICP-MS) 
and liquid chromatography (LC) ICP-MS.  
 
Gravimetric Titrimetry method:  Aliquots of 2.8 g of solution from the SRM 3037 ampoules were dispensed using 
a syringe into a bottle.  A drop of phenolphthalein  was added and, then subsequently, 1 mol/kg NaOH was added 
dropwise until the endpoint  was reached.  A phosphate solution (10 mL) was used to buffer the solution.  A slight 
excess of I2 titrant was added to the solution, changing the solution from colorless to light amber.  The excess I2 was 
back-titrated with dilute As2O3 standard solution to the starch endpoint. 
 
IC-ICP-MS method [5]:  Aliquots of 0.5 g of solution from the SRM 3037 ampoules were diluted with 25 g of DI 
H2O for the impurity analysis.  Separation of the arsenic species was carried out using a gradient chromatographic 
method at a flow rate of 1 mL/min with a Dionex IonPac guard column (4 mm x 50 mm) and AS7 (4 mm x 250 mm) 
analytical column.  The mobile phases were prepared with nitric acid, acetic acid, and sodium acetate.  Calibrants, 
containing  a  mixture  of  monomethylarsonic  acid (MMA),  dimethylarsinic  acid (DMA), 
trimethylarsine 
oxide (TMAO), arsenobetaine (AB), arsenocholine (AC), AsV, and AsIII from commercial vendors, were created to 
determine the level of As impurities.  The assigned values for all the calibrants are traceable to the derived SI unit for 
mass fraction. 
 
LC-ICP-MS method [5]:  Aliquots of 0.1 g of solution from the SRM 3037 ampoules were diluted with 100 g of 
sub-boiling distilled H2O for the impurity analysis.  Separation of the arsenic species was carried out using a gradient 
chromatographic method at a flow rate of 1 mL/min with a CC 8/4 Nucleosil 100-5 SA guard column (4 mm x 8 mm) 
and analytical column (4 mm x 250 mm).  The mobile phases were prepared with pyridine and methanol in water.  
Calibrants, containing a mixture of MMA, DMA, TMAO, AB, AC, AsV, and AsIII from commercial vendors, were 
created to determine the level of As impurities. The assigned values for all the calibrants are traceable to the derived 
SI unit for mass fraction. 
 

                                                           

identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately
(1)Certain  commercial  instruments,  materials,  or  processes  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately 
specify the experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply that the instruments, materials, or processes 
identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
SRM 3037 

Page 2 of 3 

Table 1.  Information Mass Fraction Value for Arsenic Acid in SRM 3037 

 

Arsenic acid (AsV)(a,b) 

Mass Fraction 
(µg/kg) 

171 

 

 
[1] 

(a)  IC-ICP-MS 
(b) LC-ICP-MS 
 
 

REFERENCES 

Thompson, A.;  Taylor, B.N.;  Guide  for  the  Use  of  the  International  System  of  Units (SI);  NIST  Special 
Publication  811;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington,  DC (2008); 
at 
https://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/ (accessed Feb 2018).  

available 

 
[3] 

[2]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment 
of  Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136;  U.S.  Government 
Printing Office: Washington, DC (2000); available at  
https://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF (accessed Feb 2018). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data - Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement; 
(GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections), Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (JCGM) (2008); available at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf (accessed  Feb 2018);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results; NIST Technical Note 1297, U.S. Government Printing Office:  Washington, DC (1994); available at 
https://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed Feb 2018). 
Levenson, M.S.; Banks, D.L.; Eberhardt, K.R.; Gill, L.M.; Guthrie, W.F.; Liu, H.-K.; Vangel, M.G.; Yen, J.H.; 
Zhang, N.F.; An Approach to Combining Results from Multiple Methods Motivated by the ISO GUM; J. Res. 
Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., Vol. 105, pp. 571–579 (2000). 

[4] 

[5]  Davis, W.C.;  Zeisler, R.;  Sieber, J.R.;  Yu, L.L.;  Methods  for  the  Separation  and  Quantification  of  Arsenic 
Species  in  SRM  2669  Arsenic  Species  in  Frozen  Human  Urine;  Anal.  Bioanal.  Chem.,  Vol. 396,  
pp. 3041–3050 (2010). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished 
fax (301) 948-3730; 
email srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

telephone (301) 975-2200; 

SRM  Program: 

contacting 

the 

by 

 

SRM 3037 

Page 3 of 3 

