ENT  OF 

hy. 

 
,
p
E

 
*

 
t
o

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material 3253 
 
Yerba Mate Leaves 

53 

two 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  validating  methods  for  determining 
for  quality
polycyclic  aromatic  hydrocarbons (PAHs)  in  yerba  mate  and  similar  matrices,  and  can  also  be  used  for  quality 
assurance  when  assigning  values  to  in-house  control  materials.    A  unit  of  SRM 3253  consists  of  two  heat-sealed, 
aluminized pouches, each containing approximately 10 g of ground yerba mate. 
 
The  development  of  SRM 3253  was  a  collaboration  between  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and 
Technology (NIST) and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS). 
 
Certified Mass Fraction Values:  Certified mass fraction values for selected PAHs, reported on a dry-mass basis, 
are provided in Table 1.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy 
in that all known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [1].  Analyses for value 
assignment were performed by NIST; certified values were calculated as the unweighted means of the mean values 
from NIST methods.  The associated uncertainties are expressed at an approximately 95 % level of confidence [2–4]. 
 
Reference Mass Fraction Values:  Reference mass fraction values for additional PAHs and proximates, reported on 
a dry-mass basis, are provided in Tables 2 and 3.  A NIST reference  value is a noncertified value that  is the best 
estimate  of  the  true  value  based  on  available  data;  however,  the  value  does  not  meet  the  NIST  criteria  for 
certification [1] and is provided with associated uncertainties that may reflect only measurement reproducibility, may 
not include all sources of uncertainty, or may reflect a lack of sufficient statistical agreement among multiple analytical 
methods.  The reference mass fraction values for PAHs were calculated from results reported by NIST, and values for 
proximates are based on data from a collaborating laboratory. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 3253 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until  01 January 2028,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  instructions  given  in  this 
certificate (see  “Instructions  for  Storage  and  Use”).    The  certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is  damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination of the technical measurements leading to the certification of this SRM was performed by M.M. Phillips 
of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division and K.E. Sharpless of the NIST Special Programs Office. 
 
Analyses at NIST were performed by K.D. Chieh, J.A. Murray, R.L. Paul, M.M. Schantz, and L.J. Wood of the NIST 
Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Statistical analysis was provided by J.H. Yen of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Support for the development of SRM 3253 was provided in part by NIH-ODS with technical consultation provided 
by J.M. Betz. 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
2:12 
Certificate Issue Date:  12 April 2018 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

253  was  provided  in  part  by  NIH 

and 

Page 1 of 6 

  

SRM 3253 

yntrolle 

>  packet 

Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
NOTICE  TO  USERS:    SRM 3253  IS  INTENDED  FOR  LABORATORY  USE  ONLY,  NOT  FOR  HUMAN 
CONSUMPTION. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage:  The SRM should be stored at controlled room temperature (20 °C to 25 °C) in the original unopened packets.  
The  certification  only  applies  to  the  initial  use,  as  the  material  will  take  on  additional  moisture  upon  opening  the 
packet.  The same results are not guaranteed if the remaining powder is used at a later date unless an independent 
determination of moisture is conducted using one of the methods listed under “Determination of Moisture”. 
 
Use:  Before use, the contents of the packet should be mixed thoroughly.  Allow the contents to settle for 1 min prior 
to opening to minimize the loss of fine particles.  To relate analytical determinations to the certified or reference values 
in this certificate, a test portion mass of at least 0.3 g should be used.  Results obtained in analyses should include 
their own estimates of uncertainty and can be compared to the certified or reference values using procedures described 
in reference 6. 
 
Determination  of  Moisture:    Moisture  content  of  SRM 3253  was  determined  at  NIST  by (1) freeze-drying  to 
constant  mass  over  7 d, (2) drying  over  magnesium  perchlorate  in  a  desiccator  at  room  temperature  for  28 d; 
and (3) drying  for 2 h in a forced-air oven at 90 °C.  Unweighted results obtained  using  all three techniques  were 
averaged to determine a conversion factor of (0.9566 ± 0.0023) gram dry-mass per gram as-received mass, which was 
used to convert data from an  as-received to a dry-mass basis; the  uncertainty  shown on this  value is an expanded 
uncertainty.    A  relative  uncertainty  component (0.12 %)  for  the  conversion  factor  obtained  from  the  moisture 
measurements is incorporated in the uncertainties of the certified and reference values, reported on a dry-mass basis, 
that are provided in this certificate. 
 
SOURCE, PREPARATION, AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
Source  and  Preparation:    SRM 3253  is  a  ground,  homogenized,  commercially  available  yerba  mate.    The 
commercial product was ground at NIST using an ultracentrifugation mill, and the fine powder was transferred to 
High-Purity Standards (Charleston, SC).  The material was packaged in 10 g aliquots in heat-sealed 4 mil polyethylene 
bags  then  sealed  inside  nitrogen-flushed  aluminized  plastic  bags  along  with  two  silica  gel  packets.    Following 
packaging,  SRM 3253  was  irradiated (Neutron  Products,  Inc.,  Dickerson, MD)  to  an  absorbed  dose  of  5.9 kGy  to 
7.6 kGy. 
 
Analytical Approach for Determination of PAHs:  Value assignment of the mass fractions of PAHs in SRM 3253 
was based on the combination of  measurements made at NIST using three methods based on gas chromatography 
with mass spectrometric detection (GC-MS). 
 
NIST Analyses for PAHs by GC-MS Method I:  For GC-MS Method I, mass fractions of PAHs were determined in 
two 0.3 g test portions from each of 10 packets of SRM 3253.  The yerba mate and internal standard solution (prepared 
as  a  gravimetric  dilution  of  SRM 2269  Perdeuterated  PAH-I  Solution  in  Hexane/Toluene  and  SRM 2270 
Perdeuterated PAH-II Solution in Hexane/Toluene in 2,2,4-trimethylpentane) were mixed with sodium sulfate in glass 
extraction thimbles.  Following Soxhlet extraction with hexane:acetone (1:1 volume fraction) for 20 h, the extract was 
evaporated to 5 mL under nitrogen and centrifuged.  The supernatant was fractionated using an aminopropyl solid 
phase extraction (SPE) column to isolate the fraction of interest.  The processed extract was evaporated to 0.5 mL 
under nitrogen and analyzed by GC-MS.  The GC was equipped with a 0.25 mm i.d. × 60 m Rxi®-PAH fused silica 
capillary column (Restek, Bellefonte, PA) with a 0.1 μm film thickness.  All injections were 1 μL (on-column) with 
helium as a carrier gas at a constant flow rate of 1.2 mL/min.  Electron impact MS was used for detection.  Calibrants 
were  prepared  gravimetrically  from  SRM 2260a  Aromatic  Hydrocarbons 
in  Toluene  and  SRM 1491a 
Methyl-Substituted Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Toluene at levels intended to approximate the levels of the 
PAHs in SRM 3253 following extraction.  The same internal standard solution was used for the calibrants and samples.  
Calculations are based on linear regression of response data for the calibrants. 
 
NIST Analyses for PAHs by GC-MS Method II:  For GC-MS method II, mass fractions of PAHs were determined from 
single  0.5 g  test  portions  from  each  of  six  packets  of  SRM 3253.    The  yerba  mate  and  internal  standard  solution 
                                                           

to  adequately  specify  the
(1)  Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
SRM 3253 

Page 2 of 6 

in  Hexane/Toluene  and  SRM 2270  Perdeuterated  PAH-II  Solution 

(prepared as a gravimetric dilution of SRM 2269 Perdeuterated PAH-I Solution in Hexane/Toluene and SRM 2270 
Perdeuterated PAH-II Solution in Hexane/Toluene in 2,2,4-trimethylpentane) were mixed with diatomaceous earth in 
pressurized fluid extraction (PFE) cells.  Following PFE with dichloromethane in duplicates of 6 cycles at 150 °C, the 
duplicate extracts were combined, evaporated to dryness under nitrogen, and reconstituted in 0.5 mL of hexane.  The 
extract was fractionated using aminopropyl SPE columns to isolate the fraction of interest.  The processed extract was 
evaporated to 0.5 mL under nitrogen and analyzed by GC-MS.  The GC was equipped with a 0.25 mm i.d. × 59 m 
DB-XLB fused silica capillary column (Agilent Technologies, Wilmington, DE) with a 0.25 μm film thickness.  All 
injections were 1 μL (splitless) with helium as a carrier gas at a constant flow rate of 1.2 mL/min.  Electron impact 
MS was used for detection.  Calibrants were prepared gravimetrically from SRM 2260a Aromatic Hydrocarbons in 
Toluene  and  SRM 1491a  Methyl-Substituted  Polycyclic  Aromatic  Hydrocarbons  in  Toluene,  at  levels  intended  to 
approximate the levels of the PAHs in SRM 3253 following extraction.  The same internal standard solution was used 
for the calibrants and samples.  Calculations are based on linear regression of response data for the calibrants. 
 
NIST Analyses for PAHs by GC-MS Method III:  For GC-MS Method III, mass fractions of PAHs were determined in 
three 0.5 g test portions from each of three packets of SRM 3253.  The yerba mate was mixed with diatomaceous earth 
in PFE cells.  An internal standard solution (prepared as a gravimetric dilution of SRM 2269 Perdeuterated PAH-I 
Solution 
in 
2,2,4-trimethylpentane).    Following  PFE  with  dichloromethane  in  duplicates  of  6 cycles  at  150 °C,  the  duplicate 
extracts were combined, solvent exchanged to hexane, and evaporated to a final volume of 0.5 mL.  The extract was 
fractionated  using silica SPE  columns to isolate the  fraction of  interest.  The processed  extract  was evaporated to 
0.5 mL under nitrogen and analyzed by GC-MS.  The GC was equipped with a 0.25 mm i.d. × 60 m Rxi®-PAH fused 
silica capillary column (Restek) with a 0.15 μm film thickness.  All injections were 1 μL (splitless) with helium as a 
carrier  gas  at  a  constant  flow  rate  of  1.2 mL/min.    Electron  impact  MS  was  used  for  detection.    Calibrants  were 
prepared gravimetrically from SRM 2260a Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Toluene, at levels intended to approximate the 
levels of the PAHs in SRM 3253 following extraction.  The same internal standard solution was used for the calibrants 
and samples.  Calculations are based on the average response factor relative to the labeled internal standard of the 
calibrants bracketing samples and controls. 
 
Collaborating  Laboratory’s  Analyses:    The  collaborating  laboratory  used  their  usual  methods  to  make  single 
measurements  of  proximates  and  calories  on  test  portions  taken  from  each  of  three  packets  of  SRM 3253.    The 
laboratory mean was used for value assignment, with the uncertainty estimated as the standard error of that mean. 
iat  mean. 
 
Homogeneity Assessment:  The homogeneity of PAHs was assessed using GC-MS Method I.  Analyses of variance 
with  a  5 %  significance 
level  showed  statistically  significant  heterogeneity  for  fluoranthene,  pyrene, 
benzo[c]phenanthrene, triphenylene, chrysene, benzo[b]fluoranthene, and benzo[a]fluoranthene.  The  uncertainties 
for these PAHs incorporate an additional component for possible heterogeneity. 
 
Value  Assignment:    For  calculation  of  assigned  values  for  PAHs,  the  mean  of  the  mean  values  from  GC-MS 
Method I,  GC-MS  Method  II,  and  GC-MS  method  III  results  was  used,  where  appropriate.    Assigned  values  for 
proximates were based on the mean of values from a collaborating laboratory. 
 
 

in  Hexane/Toluene 

orating 

GC

es 

 

SRM 3253 

Page 3 of 6 

Certified Mass Fraction Values for PAHs:  Each certified mass fraction value is the combined mean from the means 
of results from analyses provided by GC-MS Method I, GC-MS Method II, and GC-MS Method III, where appropriate.  
The measurand is the total mass fraction of each PAH listed in Table 1.  Metrological traceability is to the SI derived 
unit for mass fraction (expressed as nanograms per gram) on a dry-mass basis. 
 

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fraction Values for PAHs in SRM 3253 

Pyrene(b,c,d) 
Benz[a]anthracene(b,c,d) 
Benzo[a]pyrene(b,c,d) 
Perylene(b,d) 
Benzo[ghi]perylene(b,c,d) 

Mass Fraction(a) 
(ng/g) 

±  53 

324 
70.2  ±  3.0 
57.8  ±  6.9 
14.4  ±  2.7 
118.6  ±  2.3 

(a) Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the estimated value and U95%(x) is the expanded uncertainty of the value.  The 
true  value  of  the  analyte  is  believed  to  lie  within  the  interval  x ± U95%(x)  with  about  a 95 %  confidence.    To propagate  this 
uncertainty, treat the value as a normally distributed random variable with mean x and standard deviation U95%(x)/2. 

(b) GC-MS Method I 
(c) GC-MS Method II 
(d) GC-MS Method III 
 
 
Reference Mass Fraction Values for PAHs:  Each reference mass fraction value is the mean or combined mean 
from one or more of the three GC-MS method results.  The measurand is the mass fraction of each PAH listed in 
Table 2.  Metrological traceability is to the SI derived unit for mass fraction (expressed as nanograms per gram) on a 
dry-mass basis, as realized by the methods used. 
 

Table 2.  Reference Mass Fraction Values for PAHs in SRM 3253 

 

 

 

 

2-Methylphenanthrene(b,c) 
3-Methylphenanthrene(b,c) 
Fluoranthene(d) 
1-Methylpyrene(b,c) 
Benzo[c]phenanthrene(b,c,d) 
Chrysene(d) 
Triphenylene(d) 
Benzo[b]fluoranthene(b,d) 
Benzo[k]fluoranthene(c,d) 
Benzo[a]fluoranthene(b,d) 
Indeno[1,2,3-cd]pyrene(b,c) 
Picene(d) 
Coronene(b) 

Mass Fraction(a) 
(ng/g) 

±  10 
±  14 
±  48 

1.6 
2.4 

6.9 

±  16 

±  22 

69 
62 
280 
18.8  ± 
18.9  ± 
128 
29.1  ± 
48 
25.1  ± 
14.7  ± 
57.7  ± 
12.72 ± 
43.8  ± 

9.1 
3.8 
4.2 
0.58 
1.8 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(a) Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the estimated value and U95%(x) is the expanded uncertainty of the value.  The 
method-specific true value of the analyte is believed to lie within the interval x ± U95%(x) with about a 95 % confidence.  To 
propagate  this  uncertainty,  treat  the  value  as  a  normally  distributed  random  variable  with  mean  x  and  standard  deviation 
U95%(x)/2. 

(b) GC-MS Method I 
(c) GC-MS Method II 
(d) GC-MS Method III 

 

 

SRM 3253 

Page 4 of 6 

Reference Mass Fraction Values for Proximates and Calories:  Each reference mass fraction value is the mean 
from collaborating laboratory results.  The measurands are the mass fractions listed in Table 3, on a dry-mass basis, 
as  determined  by  the  methods  indicated.    Metrological  traceability  is  to  mass  fraction (expressed  as  grams  per 
100 grams)  as  realized  by  the  methods  used.    For  calories,  the  measurand  is  the  caloric  content (expressed  as 
kilocalories  per  100  grams),  listed  in  Table 3  on  a  dry-mass  basis  as  determined  by  the  method  indicated  and 
metrological traceability is to the scale realized by that method for energy. 
 

Table 3.  Reference Mass Fraction Values for Proximates and Calories in SRM 3253 

 

 

 

Ash(b) 
Protein(c) 
Carbohydrates(d) 
Total Fat(e) 
 

Calories 

Mass Fraction(a) 
(g/100 g) 

5.81 ± 
10.64 ± 
77.8  ± 
5.4  ± 

0.17 
0.90 
3.1 
3.4 

Mass Fraction(a) 
(kcal/100 g) 

402 

±  15 

 
 
 
 
 

 

(a) Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the estimated value and U95%(x) is the expanded uncertainty of the value.  The 
method-specific true value of the analyte is believed to lie within the interval x ± U95%(x) with about a 95 % confidence.  To 
propagate  this  uncertainty,  treat  the  value  as  a  normally  distributed  random  variable  with  mean  x  and  standard  deviation 
U95%(x)/2. 

(b) Ash was determined by a collaborating laboratory using weight loss after ignition in muffle furnace. 
(c) Nitrogen was determined by a collaborating laboratory using combustion.  A factor of 6.25 was used to convert nitrogen results 

to protein. 

(d) Carbohydrates were determined by a collaborating laboratory by difference (solids less the sum of protein, fat, and ash). 
(e) Total fat was determined by a collaborating laboratory using the Mojonnier method. 
 
 

 

SRM 3253 

Page 5 of 6 

REFERENCES 

at 

[2] 

 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of 
Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136 (2000);  available  at 
https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/srm/SP260-136.PDF (accessed Apr 2018). 
JCGM 100:2008;  Evaluation  of  Measurement  Data  —  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in 
Measurement (ISO  GUM  1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology (2008); 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf (accessed 
available 
Apr 2018); see also Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of 
NIST  Measurement  Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office: 
Washington, DC (1994); available at https://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/tn1297/index.cfm (accessed Apr 2018). 
JCGM 101:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data – Supplement 1 to the Guide to Expression of Uncertainty 
in  Measurement;  Propagation  of  Distributions  Using  a  Monte  Carlo  Method;  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in 
Metrology;  International  Bureau  of  Weights  and  Measures (BIPM),  Sèvres, France (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_101_2008_E.pdf (accessed Apr 2018). 
[4]  Efron, B.; Tibshirani, R.J.; An Introduction to the Bootstrap; Chapman & Hall, London, UK (1993). 
[5]  Thompson, A.;  Taylor, B.N.;  Guide  for  the  Use  of  the  International  System  of  Units (SI);  NIST  Special 
at 

Printing  Office:  Washington, DC (2008); 

Publication 811;  U.S.  Government 
https://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/sp811/index.cfm (accessed Apr 2018). 

aan  &  Hall,  London, 

‘ystem  of  Units

available 

[3] 

[6]  Sharpless, K.E.; Lippa, K.A.; Duewer, D.L.; Rukhin, A.L.; The ABCs of Using Standard Reference Materials in 
the  Analysis  of  Foods  and  Dietary  Supplements:  A  Practical  Guide;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-181; 
U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (2014); available at  
https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/srm/SP260-181r1-2.pdf (accessed Apr 2018). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program:    telephone (301)  975-2200;  fax (301)  948-3730;  e-mail 
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 3253 

Page 6 of 6 

