 

ext oF  oy 

BF 

Somes  or 

 

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

g-

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 3284 

 

 
Cranberry-Containing Solid Oral Dosage Form 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  validating  analytical  methods  for  the 
determination of organic acids in solid oral dosage forms containing cranberry with mixed botanicals and in similar 
matrices.  This SRM can also be used for quality assurance when assigning values to in-house control materials.  A 
unit of SRM 3284 consists of five packets, each containing approximately 2.5 g of powdered material. 
 
The  development  of  SRM 3284  was  a  collaboration  between  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and 
Technology (NIST) and the National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements (NIH-ODS). 
 
Certified  Mass  Fraction  Values:    The  certified  mass  fraction  values  of  selected  organic  acids  are  provided  in 
Table 1.   A  NIST  certified  value  is  a  value  for  which  NIST  has  the  highest  confidence  in  its  accuracy  in  that  all 
known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [1].  Values were derived from the 
combination of results provided by NIST using two analytical methods.  The certified values in this material are the 
equally weighted means of the individual sets of results; the associated uncertainties are expanded uncertainties at the 
95 % level of confidence [2–4].  Values are reported on a dry-mass basis in mass fraction units [5]. 
 
Reference Values:  Reference mass fraction values for additional organic acids and anions are provided in Table 2.  
Reference  values  for  total  antioxidant  capacity  are  provided  in Table 3.    Reference  values  are  noncertified  values 
that  are  the  best  estimate  of  the  true  values  based  on  available  data;  however,  the  values  do  not  meet  the  NIST 
criteria  for  certification [1]  and  are  provided  with  associated  uncertainties  that  may  reflect  only  measurement 
reproducibility, may not include all sources of uncertainty, or may reflect a lack of sufficient statistical agreement 
among multiple analytical methods. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 3284 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until  30 November 2015,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  instructions  given  in  this 
certificate  (see  “Warning  and  Instructions  for  Storage  and  Use”).    The  certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is 
damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance  of  SRM  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If 
substantive  technical  changes  occur  that affect  the  certification before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST will 
notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
Support for the development of SRM 3284 was provided in part by NIH-ODS.  Technical consultation was provided 
by J.M. Betz of the NIH-ODS. 
 
The overall direction and coordination of the technical measurements leading to the certification of this SRM were 
performed by L.C. Sander, K.E. Sharpless, and S.A. Wise of the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division. 
 
Acquisition of the material was performed by K.E. Sharpless of the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division. 
 
Statistical analysis was provided by J.H. Yen of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  24 February 2012 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 
 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

Stephen A. Wise, Chief 
Analytical Chemistry Division 

 

 

 

SRM 3284 

Page 1 of 4 

Analytical  measurements  at  NIST  were  performed  by  M.M. Phillips,  B.J. Porter,  and  L.J. Wood  of  the  NIST 
Analytical  Chemistry  Division.    Results  were  also  provided  by  analysts  participating  in  an  interlaboratory 
comparison  exercise  involving  members  of  the  Grocery  Manufacturers Association  Food  Industry Analytical 
Chemists  Committee (GMA  FIACC),  Washington, DC:    Campbell  Soup  Company,  Camden, NJ;  Covance,  Inc., 
Madison, WI;  Eurofins  Chemical  Control,  Cuneo, Italy;  Eurofins  S&S,  Hanover, MD;  General  Mills,  Golden 
Valley, MN;  McCormick  and  Company,  Hunt  Valley, MD;  National  Center  of  Food  Safety  and  Technology, 
Summit-Argo, IL;  NSF  International,  Ann  Arbor, MI;  Ocean  Spray,  Lakeville, MA;  The  Hershey  Company 
Technical Center, Hershey, PA; and Welch’s, Billerica, MA. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Measurement  Services 
Division. 
 
WARNING AND INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 

Warning:  For laboratory use only.  Not for human consumption. 

Storage:  The material should be stored at controlled room temperature (20 °C to 25 °C), in an unopened packet, until 
needed.    The  certification  does  not  apply  to  contents  of  previously  opened  and  stored  packets  as  the  stability  of 
analytes has not been investigated. 

Use:  Prior to removal of a test portion for analysis, the contents of a packet of material should be mixed thoroughly.  
For certified values to be valid, test portions of the powder equal to or greater than 0.1 g for organic acid analyses 
should be used.  The stability of organic acids in previously opened and stored packets has not been investigated.  
Test  portions  should  be  analyzed  as  received  and  results  converted  to  a  dry-mass  basis  by  determining  moisture 
content (described below) on a separate test portion. 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
Material  Acquisition  and  Preparation:    The  materials  used  for  production  of  SRM 3284  consisted  of  three 
commercially  available  products  labeled  as  containing  cranberry  extract  and  juice  concentrate,  buchu,  juniper 
berries,  uva  ursi,  and  vitamin C.    Tablets  and  contents  of  capsules  were  individually  ground  and  sieved  to 
180 µm (80 mesh).  The material was then shipped to High-Purity Standards (Charleston, SC), where it was blended, 
aliquotted,  and  heat-sealed  inside  nitrogen-flushed  4 mil  polyethylene  bags,  which  were  then  sealed  inside 
nitrogen-flushed  aluminized  plastic  bags  along  with  two  packets  of  silica  gel  each.    Following  packaging, 
SRM 3284 was irradiated (Neutron Products, Inc., Dickerson, MD) at an absorbed dose of 7.1 kGy to 8.9 kGy. 
 
Analytical Approach for Determination of Organic Acids:  Value assignment of the mass fractions of the organic 
acids in SRM 3284 was based on the combination of measurements from two different methods:  isotope dilution 
liquid  chromatography  with  mass  spectrometric  detection (ID-LC/MS)  and  ion  chromatography  with  conductivity 
detection (IC-CD).  Duplicate test portions of approximately 0.1 g were taken from each of six packets for analysis 
using  each  of  the  methods,  and  internal  standards  were  added.    Organic  acids  were  extracted  into  water,  and  the 
solutions from four such successive extractions were combined. 
 
For  ID-LC/MS,  an  organic  acid  column  was  held  at  40 °C.    An  aqueous  mobile  phase  containing  0.5 %  (volume 
fraction)  formic  acid  was  used  under  isocratic  conditions.    The  flow  rate  was  set  to  0.5 mL/min  and  the  sample 
injection volume was 10 µL.  The mass spectrometer was operated in negative ion mode, with atmospheric pressure 
electrospray ionization (AP-ESI).  Each organic acid was matched with a  13C- or  2H-labeled internal standard, and 
quantitation was based on response factors calculated from the relative peak areas and concentrations [6]. 
 
For  analysis  by  IC-CD,  a  hydroxide-selective  anion  exchange  column  was  held  at  30 °C,  and  a  flow  rate  of 
1.5 mL/min  was  used  for  the  separation.   Ultrapure water  was used  for  generation  of a  hydroxide gradient,  and  a 
current of 186 mA was applied for suppression of the background conductivity from the hydroxide mobile phase.  
Quantitation was based on relative peak areas with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) as an internal standard [6]. 
 
Collaborating Laboratories’ Analyses:  The GMA FIACC laboratories were asked to use their usual methods to 
make  single  measurements  on  test  portions  taken  from  each  of  three  packets  of  SRM 3284.    The  collaborating 
laboratories’  data  were  used  to  assign  reference  values  for  antioxidant  capacity.    Three  antioxidant  methods  were 
employed: 
reagent (Folin-C),  and 
radical  absorbance  capacity (ORAC),  Folin-Ciocalteau’s 
2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydraxyl (DPPH) as the reagent. 
 
                                                 

  oxygen 

(1)  Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental  procedure.    Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  National  Institute  of 
Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the 
purpose. 
SRM 3284 

Page 2 of 4 

Determination  of  Moisture:    Moisture  content  of  SRM 3284  was  determined  at  NIST  (see  “Warning  and 
Instructions  for  Storage  and  Use”)  by  (1) freeze-drying  to  constant  mass  over  7 d;  (2) drying  over  magnesium 
perchlorate  in  a  desiccator  at  room  temperature  for  21 d;  and  (3) drying  for  2 h  in  a  forced-air  oven  at  80 C.  
Unweighted  results  obtained  using  all  three  techniques  were  averaged  to  determine  a  conversion  factor  of 
(0.9767  0.0067) gram dry mass per gram as-received mass, which was used to convert data from an as-received to 
a dry-mass basis; the uncertainty shown on this value is an expanded uncertainty.  An uncertainty component for the 
conversion  factor (0.35 %)  obtained  from  the  moisture  measurements  is  incorporated  in  the  uncertainties  of  the 
certified and reference values, reported on a dry-mass basis, that are provided in this certificate. 
 
Homogeneity Assessment:  The homogeneity of organic acid content was assessed at NIST by using the methods 
described above.  An analysis of variance did not show inhomogeneity for the test portions analyzed (see “Warning 
and Instructions for Storage and Use”). 
 
Value Assignment:  The equally weighted means from each set of data available were used to calculate the assigned 
values for organic acids.  The median of laboratory means was used to calculate the reference values for antioxidant 
capacity. 
 
Certified Mass Fraction Values for Organic Acids:  Each certified mass fraction is an equally weighted mean of 
results provided by ID-LC/MS and IC-CD.  The uncertainty provided with each value is an expanded uncertainty 
about  the  mean  to  cover  the  measurand  with  approximately  95 %  confidence.    It  expresses  both  the  observed 
difference  between  the  results  from  the  methods  and  their  respective  uncertainties,  incorporating  an  uncertainty 
component for moisture correction, consistent with the ISO Guide and with its Supplement 1 [2-4].  The expanded 
uncertainty  is  calculated  as  U = kuc,  where  uc  is  intended  to  represent,  at  the  level  of  one  standard  deviation,  the 
effects of the combined components of uncertainty, and k is a coverage factor corresponding to approximately 95 % 
confidence for each analyte. 
 

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fraction Values for Organic Acids in SRM 3284 
 

 

 

 
Citric Acid  
Malic Acid  
Quinic Acid  

Mass Fraction 
(mg/g) 

34.7 
19.9 
25.9 

 
 
 

4.8 
1.9 
3.5 

 
Reference  Mass  Fraction  Values  for  Organic  Acids  and  Anions:    Each  reference  mass  fraction  is  a  mean  of 
results  provided  by  IC-CD,  except  for  shikimic  acid,  which  was  determined  by  ID-LC/MS.    The  uncertainty 
provided  with  each  value  is  an  expanded  uncertainty  about  the  mean  to  cover  the  measurand  with  approximately 
95 % confidence [2].  The uncertainty incorporates within-method uncertainty and a component related to moisture 
correction,  consistent  with  the  ISO  Guide [2].    The  expanded  uncertainty  is  calculated  as  U = kuc,  where  uc  is 
intended to represent, at the level of one standard deviation, the effects of the combined components of uncertainty, 
and k is a coverage factor corresponding to approximately 95 % confidence for each analyte. 
 

Table 2.  Reference Mass Fraction Values for Organic Acids and Anions in SRM 3284 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 

Galacturonic Acid  
Isocitric Acid  
Oxalic Acid  
Phosphate  
Shikimic Acid 
Sulfate  

Mass Fraction 
(mg/g) 

1.713   
0.169   
33.2 
 
 
72.3 
0.601   
1.72   

0.039 
0.008 
1.3 
2.9 
0.032 
0.19 

k 

2.00 
2.00 
2.00 

k 

2.15 
2.19 
2.18 
2.18 
2.19 
2.20 

 
Reference Values for Antioxidant Capacity:  Each reference value is the median of the mean results provided by 
the  GMA  FIACC  laboratories.    The  uncertainty  provided  with  each  value  is  an  expanded  uncertainty  about  the 
median  to  cover  the  measurand  with  approximately  95 %  confidence,  consistent  with  the  ISO  Guide [2].    The 
uncertainty incorporates within-method uncertainty and a component related to moisture correction.  The expanded 
uncertainty  is  calculated  as  U = kuc,  where  uc  is  intended  to  represent,  at  the  level  of  one  standard  deviation,  the 
effects of the combined components of uncertainty, and k is a coverage factor corresponding to approximately 95 % 
confidence for each analyte. 

SRM 3284 

Page 3 of 4 

 

 

 

Table 3.  Reference Values for Total Antioxidant Capacity of SRM 3284 

Method 

ORAC 

Result 

Units 

680    310 

 

 

 

DPPH 

795    77 

Folin-C  

83    23 

micromoles Trolox 
equivalents per gram 

micromoles Trolox 
equivalents per gram 

milligrams gallic acid  
per gram 

k 

2.57 

4.30 

2.31 

[2] 

REFERENCES 
 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment 
of  Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication 260-136  (2000);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF (accessed Feb 2012). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(ISO  GUM  1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology (JCGM)  (2008); 
available 
(accessed 
Feb 2012); see also Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of 
NIST  Measurement  Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC 
(1994); available at http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/tn1297/index.cfm (accessed Feb 2012). 
JCGM 101:2008; Evaluation of measurement data – Supplement 1 to the “Guide to Expression of Uncertainty 
in  Measurement”  -  Propagation  of  distributions  using  a  Monte  Carlo  method;  JCGM  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_101_2008_E.pdf (accessed Feb 2012). 
[4]  Efron, B.; Tibshirani, R.J.; An Introduction to the Bootstrap; Chapman & Hall, London, UK (1993). 
[5]  Thompson, A.;  Taylor, B.N.;  Guide  for  the  Use  of  the  International  System  of  Units (SI);  NIST  Special 
at 

http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf 

Printing  Office:  Washington, DC 

Publication 811;  U.S.  Government 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/sp811/index.cfm (accessed Feb 2012). 

available 

(2008); 

[3] 

at 

[6]  Phillips, M.M.;  Case, R.J.;  Rimmer, C.A.;  Sharpless, K.E.;  Wise, S.A.;  Sander, L.C.;  Determination  of 
Organic  Acids  in  Vaccinium  Berry  Standard  Reference  Materials;  Anal.  Bioanal.  Chem.,  Vol. 398, 
pp. 425-434 (2010). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certificate  Revision  History:    24 February 2012  (Added  reference  values  for  antioxidant  capacity;  editorial  changes);  14 September 2010 
(Original certificate issue date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
(301) 926-4751; 
telephone 
accomplished  by  contacting 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

fax 

 

SRM 3284 

Page 4 of 4 

