National  Dnstitute  of  Standards  &  Tectmologp 

Certificate  of  Analysis 

Standard  Reference  Material  330 
Copper  Ore,  Mill  Heads 

This  material  is  in  the  form  of  fine  powder  intended  for  use  both  in  checking  chemical  methods  of  analysis 
and  in  calibration  of  instrumental  methods  of  analysis. 

This  SRM  is  issued  primarily  for  use  in  evaluation  of  the  critically  important  "material  balance”  in  the  copper 
mining  and  metallurgical  industries. 

CAUTION:  The  bottle  should  be  kept  tightly  closed  except  when  in  direct  use.  Store  in  a  desiccator  over 
desiccant. 

Constituent 

Certified  Value  2° 

Total  Copper 
Molybdenum 

Rhenium 

Table  1. 

Certified 

Values 

Percent  by  Weight 

ppm  by  Weight 

0.84 
0.018 

0,30 

Estimated 
Uncertainty® 

0.01 
0.001 

0.06 

‘Based  on  samples  dried  at  105  °C  for  two  hours.  Separate  samples  are  used  for  rhenium  and  calculated  to  a  dry-weight  basis. 

e  certified  value  is  the  best  estimate  of  the  "true"  value. 

“Estimated  uncertainty  includes  both  method  imprecision  and  material  variability  with  samples  0.5  g  (or  more)  for  total  copper,  1.0  g  (or 
more)  for  molybdenum,  and  2.5  g  (or  more)  for  rhenium. 

Homogeneity  testing  of  selected  samples  representative  of  the  lot  of  SRM  330  was  performed  simultaneously 
with  the  analytical  program  for  certification.  At  NIST,  0.5  g  samples  showed  the  maximum  variability  for  total 
copper  to  be  +  0.010  percent. 
At  Magma,  2.5  g  samples  showed  the  maximum  variability  to  be  +  0.01 
percent. 

This  Certificate  of Analysis  has  undergone  editorial  revision  to  reflect program  and  organizational  changes  at  NIST 
and  at  the  Department  of  Commerce.  No  attempt  was  made  to  reevaluate  the  certificate  value  or  any  technical 
data  presented  in  this  certificate. 

Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 
August  1,  1991 
(Revision  of  Certificate 
dated  1-20-77) 

(over)

William  P.  Reed,  Chief 

Standard  Reference  Materials Program 

  

PLANNING,  PREPARATION,  TESTING,  ANALYSIS:  The  material  for  this  SRM  (330)  was  carefully 
selected  and  provided  to  NIST  by  Magma  Copper  Company,  San  Manuel,  Arizona,  through  the  courtesy  of 
T.L.  Young. 

At  NIST  this  material  was  sieved  and  thoroughly  blended,  which  involved  several  independent  procedures. 

Cooperative  analyses  were  performed  at  the  Magma  Copper  Company,  San  Manuel,  Arizona,  by  B.  Cripe,  R.L. 
Culder,  A.B.  Hall,  D.A.  Shah,  J.T.  Tadano,  and  M.  Toelkes. 

Analyses  were  performed  in  the  NIST  Analytical  Chemistry  Division  by  E.L.  Garner,  J.W.  Gramlich,  L.A. 
Machlan,  E.J.  Maienthal,  J.R.  Moody,  and  T.J.  Murphy. 

The  following  values  indicate  the  results  of  the  analytical  tests  made  at  NIST  and  the  Magma  Copper 
Company. 

Constituent/Method 

Average 

Standard 
Deviation! 

Number  of 
Determinations 

Total  Copper 

Percent  by  Weight 

Isotopic  dilution  mass  spectrometry” 
(0.5  g  samples) 
Polarographic  (0.5  g  samples) 
Iodometric  (2.5  g  samples)* 

0.837 

0.85 
0.85 

0.007 

0.01 
0.01 

8 

3 
21 

Molybdenum 

Range 

Isotopic  dilution  mass  spectrometry” 
(1  g  samples) 

.0180 

0.0001 

2 

Rhenium 

Isotopic  dilution  mass  spectrometry” 
(2.5  g  samples) 

ppm  by  Weight 

0.303 

0.054 

6 

log  single  determinations  for  total  Cu;  range  given  for  Mo  and  Re. 

is  method  has  been  studied  extensively  and  the  data  are  considered  free  from  systematic  errors  [1]. 

Results  from  Magma  Copper  Company. 

The  overall  direction  and  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  at  NIST  leading  to  certification  were 
performed  under  the  direction  of  W.R.  Shields  and  LL.  Barnes. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  original  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this 
Standard  Reference  Material  were  coordinated  through  the  Standard  Reference  Materials  Program  by  R.E. 
Michaelis.  Revision  of  the  certificate  was  coordinated  through  the  Standard  Reference  Materials  Program  by 
JS.  Kane.

ADDITIONAL  INFORMATION  ON  THE  COMPOSITION:  Certification  is  made  only  for  total  Cu,  Mo, 
and  Re.  Although  NOT  CERTIFIED,  the  following  additional  information  on  the  composition  may  be  of 
interest. 

Fire  assay  determinations  for  Au  and  Ag  were  made  at  Magma  Copper  Company: 

Gold  _and_  Silver 

Weight 
ppm  by 

Gold 

(0.093) 

Silver 

(1.51) 

Fire  assay 

“Acid-Soluble”  _ Copper 

The  total  copper  content  includes  "recoverable"  sulfide  copper  and  "“nonrecoverable"  oxide  copper.  Industrial 
practice  is 
the  oxide  copper  content. 
Investigation  at  NIST  provided  additional  information  on  "acid-soluble"  copper  that  may  be  useful,  but  is  not 
certified: 

to  determine  “acid-soluble”  copper  and  to  relate  this  result  to 

Constituent/Method 

Average 

Range 

Number  of 
Determinations 

"Acid-Soluble"”  Copper 
Isotopic  dilution  mass 
spectrometry  (2.5  g  samples) 

Percent  by  Weight 

(0.069) 

(0.063-0.081) 

9 

[i]  W.R.  Shields,  Editor,  Nat.  Bur.  Stand.  Tech.  Note  546,  (1970).

REFERENCES 

