National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material 606 
 
Trace Elements in Basalt Glass 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended to facilitate development of chemical methods of analysis for 
trace elements in a natural ferro-magnesian silicate glass intended for use with measurement techniques such as laser 
ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS) and microbeam X-ray fluorescence (μXRF).  
This  SRM  can  also  be  used  for  quality  assurance  when  assigning  values  to  in-house  control  materials.    A  unit  of 
SRM 606 consists of a single piece of basalt glass mounted in epoxy.  The epoxy mounted material has a cylindrical 
shape approximately 14 mm tall and 12.5 mm in diameter. 
 
Certified Mass Fraction Values:  Certified values for constituents of SRM 606 and their corresponding standard 
uncertainties (uc) and 95 % uncertainty intervals are reported in Table 1 as mass fractions.  A National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy 
in that all known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or considered [1].  A certified value is a best 
estimate of the true value based on the results of analyses performed at NIST and collaborating laboratories.  The 
certified values in this material are the unweighted means of the individual sets of NIST results and results from the 
U.S.  Geological  Survey (USGS)  Reference  Materials  Project.    The  standard  uncertainty  and  corresponding  95 % 
uncertainty intervals were computed using the NIST Consensus Builder [2].  The uncertainty intervals are asymmetric 
about the consensus value in this case [3].  The combined standard uncertainty uc incorporates the observed difference 
between  the  results  from  the  methods  and  their  respective  uncertainties,  and  an  uncertainty  component  for 
homogeneity, consistently with the ISO/JCGM Guide and its Supplement 1 [4,5].  The certified mass fraction values 
in  Table 1  are  metrologically  traceable  to  the  International  System  of  Units (SI)  derived  unit  of  milligrams  per 
kilogram on a dry-mass basis. 
 
Reference  Mass  Fraction  Values:    A  reference  value  for  Ce  is  reported  in  Table 2  as a  mass  fraction.    A  NIST 
reference value is a noncertified value that is a best estimate of the true value based on available data; however, the 
value  does  not  meet  the  NIST  criteria  for  certification  and  is  provided  with  associated  uncertainties  that  may  not 
include all sources of uncertainty [1].  The reference mass fraction values were derived from results reported by NIST 
and collaborating laboratories.  The reference values are the unweighted means of the individual sets of NIST and 
collaborator  results.    The  uncertainty  intervals  are  asymentric  about  the  consensus  value  in  their  respective 
uncertainties,  and  an  uncertainty  component  for  homogeneity,  consistent  with  the  ISO/JCGM  Guide  and  its 
Supplement [4,5], and k is a coverage factor corresponding to approximately 95 % confidence [4,5].  The reference 
mass  fraction  values  in  Table 2  are  metrologically  traceable  to  calibration  procedures  and  standards  used  by 
experienced measurement community.  
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 606 is valid indefinitely, within the measurement uncertainty 
specified, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with the instructions given in this certificate (see 
wise 
“Instructions for Use”).  However, the certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise 
modified. 
 
Project development and coordination of the SRM material was performed by R.D. Vocke and S.E. Long of the NIST 
Chemical Sciences Division and S.A. Wilson of USGS. 
 
Coordination of the technical measurements leading to the certification of this SRM was performed by W.C. Davis of 
the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Analyses at NIST were performed by W.C. Davis, and J.L. Molloy of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
04
Certificate Issue Date:  04 May 2018 
SRM 606 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 
Page 1 of 4 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

SRM 

W.C. 

 
 

Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Statistical  analyses  for  determining  consensus  values  and  corresponding  uncertainty  intervals  were  provided  by 
H. Iyer of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
ordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 

orresponding  uncertainty  intervals 

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fraction Values for Elements in SRM 606 
 

SRM 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

Standard Uncertainty, uc 
(mg/kg) 

95 % Coverage Interval(a) 
(mg/kg) 

Element 

Barium (Ba)(b,c,d) 
Cobalt (Co)(b,c,d) 
Chromium (Cr)(b,c,d) 
Copper (Cu)(b,c,d) 
Lanthanum (La)(b,c,d) 
Lead (Pb)(b,c) 
Scandium (Sc)(b,c,d) 
Strontium (Sr)(b,c,d) 
Vanadium (V)(b,c,d) 
Yttrium (Y)(b,c,d) 
Zinc (Zn)(b,c,d) 

174 

48.3 

315 

86.5 

5.45 
4.26 

33.6 

169 
266 

17.1 
79.2 

5 
1.3 
9 
2.3 
0.78 
0.60 
4.8 
5 
10 
1.8 
3.8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

–  186 

166 
45.3  –  50.7 

302  

–  336 

83.2  –  92.1 

4.61  – 
3.55  – 

7.14 
5.43 

23.7  –  39.6 
–  178 
160 
–  288 
251 
13 
–  19.4 
73.1  –  86.3 

(a) The standard uncertainty and corresponding 95 % uncertainty intervals were computed using the NIST Consensus Builder [2]. 
The uncertainty intervals are asymmetric about the consensus value in this case [3].  The combined standard uncertainty, uc, 
ective  uncertainties,  and  an  uncertainty 
incorporates the observed difference between the results from the methods and their respective uncertainties, and an uncertainty 
component for homogeneity, consistent with the ISO/JCGM Guide and its Supplement 1 [4,5]. 

(b) NIST ICP-MS 
(c) USGS ICP-MS 
(d) USGS ICP-OES 
 
 

Element 

Table 2.  Reference Mass Fraction Values for Elements in SRM 606 
 

SRM

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

Standard Uncertainty, uc 
(mg/kg) 

95 % Coverage Interval(a) 
(mg/kg) 

Cerium (Ce)( b,c,d) 

14.6 

3.8 

11 – 20.8 

(a) The standard uncertainty and corresponding 95 % uncertainty intervals were computed using the NIST Consensus Builder [2]. 
The uncertainty intervals are asymmetric about the consensus value in this case [3].  The combined standard uncertainty, uc, 
incorporates the observed difference between the results from the methods and their respective uncertainties, and an uncertainty 
component for homogeneity, consistent with the ISO/JCGM Guide and its Supplement 1 [4,5]. 

(b) NIST ICP-MS 
(c) USGS ICP-MS 
(d) USGS ICP-OES 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Each wafer surface should be cleaned before use.  To prepare a wafer for analysis, wipe it clean with ethanol and then 
do a mild surface cleaning (not etch) in dilute (1:10) HNO3.  The material should be stored in its original container in 
a cool, dry location. 
 
To use the uncertainty intervals given in this certificate in comparisons and calculations, the user must be aware that 
intervals are not symmetric about the assigned values.  The use of the intervals depends on the context, and instructions 
for two common uses follow. 
 
Direct comparison to a result of a user determination: For this case, directly compare a coverage interval calculated 
by the user for their result to the appropriate coverage interval provided in this certificate. 
 

SRM 606 

Page 2 of 4 

Propagation of uncertainty when using SRM 606 as a calibration standard:  When a value provided in this certificate 
is  used  to  calibrate  a  measurement  process,  the  uncertainty  associated  with  that  value  should  be  appropriately 
propagated  into  the  user’s  uncertainty  calculation.    The  asymmetric  intervals  in  Table 1  and  Table 2  cannot  be 
interpreted as (value ± kuc), where k is an expansion factor, and uc is a combined standard uncertainty representative 
of both sides of the interval around the value.  The user may use a Monte Carlo method for propagation of probability 
distributions.  This can be done using the NIST Uncertainty Machine [see reference 6 for detailed instructions].  
 
ANALYSIS 
 
Homogeneity Assessment:  The homogeneity of representative elements was performed by micro X-ray fluorescence 
(μXRF) and  measured in 4 mm × 4 mm areas of three different samples  with an analysis point spacing of 50 μm.  
Microscale  heterogeneity  testing  using  µXRF  resulted  in  an  estimated  minimum  recommended  mass  of  0.3 mg.  
Analyses of variance and graphical analyses of the data found no detectable inhomogeneity at 95% confidence.  No 
assessment of the microscale heterogeneity was conducted for Ba, La, Pb, and Ce. 
 
Determination of Elements:  Value assignment of the  mass  fractions of the elements in SRM 606  was based on 
measurements  using  inductively  coupled  plasma  optical  emission  spectrometry (ICP-OES),  inductively  coupled 
plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), and isotope dilution ICP-MS (ID-ICP-MS). 
 
ICP-OES and ICP-MS methods from the USGS:  For the determination of all elements 0.2 g test portions of the bulk 
SRM 606 material were digested with an aluminum heat block using nitric acid, perchloric, and hydrofluoric acid.  
Quantification  for  all  analyses  was  based  on  standardizing  with  digested  rock  reference  materials  and  a  series  of 
multi-element solution standards. 
 
ICP-MS  methods  from  NIST:  For  the  determination  of  cerium,  cobalt,  lanthanum,  lead,  scandium,  vanadium,  and 
yttrium, test portions of 0.25 g of the bulk SRM 606 material were digested in a closed-vessel microwave system using 
a  mixture  of  hydrofluoric  acid,  hydrochloric  and  nitric  acid.    Measurements  were  made  at  mass  resolution  of 
approximately 4000 using a sector-field ICP-MS by the method of standard additions. 
 
ID-ICP-MS methods from NIST: For the determination barium, chromium, copper, strontium, and zinc, test portions 
of 0.25 g of the bulk SRM 606 material were digested with enriched isotopes in a closed-vessel microwave system 
using a mixture of hydrofluoric acid, hydrochloric acid and nitric acid.  Isotopic measurements were made at mass 
resolution of approximately 4000 using a sector-field ICP-MS.   
 
SOURCE AND PREPARATION 
 
SRM 606 consists of a geological matrix produced by processing SRM 688 Basalt Rock into a glass material.  The 
glass matrix was produced by heating the SRM powdered material in a platinum bowl in a furnace at ≈ 1300 °C.  
The molten material was removed from the furnace and mixed with a platinum rod and returned to the furnace for 
further heating.  After several mixing/heating cycles, the material was cooled and then mechanically sub-divided 
into  smaller  pieces.    For  the final  SRM  material,  individual  pieces of  the  resultant  basalt  glass  material  will  be 
mounted in an epoxy casing to provide a level structure, and surface polished to provide a flat surface and then 
packaged into units of SRM 606 at NIST.   
 
 
 

 

SRM 606 

Page 3 of 4 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of 
Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136 (2000);  available  at 
https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/srm/SP260-136.PDF (accessed May 2018). 

[2]  Koepke, A.;  Lafarge, T.;  Possolo, A.;  Toman, B.;  Consensus  Building  for  Interlaboratory  Studies,  Key 
Comparisons,  and  Meta-analysis;  Metrologia,  Vol. 54,  p. S34  (2017)  available  at  https://consensus.nist.gov/ 
(accessed May 2018). 

[4] 

[3]  Possolo, A.; Simple Guide for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results, NIST 
Technical  Note  1900,  (2015)  available  at  http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/TechnicalNotes/NIST.TN.1900.pdf 
(accessed May 2018). 
JCGM 100:2008;  Evaluation  of  Measurement  Data  —  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in 
Measurement (GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections); Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (2008); available 
at http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf (accessed May 2018); see also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC (1994);  available  at 
https://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/tn1297/index.cfm (accessed May 2018). 
JCGM 101:2008;  Evaluation  of  Measurement  Data  —  Supplement  1  to  the  “Guide  to  the  Expression  of 
Uncertainty in Measurement” — Propagation of Distributions Using a Monte Carlo Method; JCGM (2008); 
available at http://www.bipm.org/en/publications/guides/gum.html (accessed May 2018). 

[5] 

[6]  NIST Uncertainty Machine, available at https://uncertainty.nist.gov  (accessed May 2018).  The user enters the 
measurement equation and standard uncertainty estimates or probability distributions describing uncertainty for 
the terms of the equation.  For the estimate of uncertainty of the calibration value, the user would choose the 
“Sample values” option and provide a file containing the actual distribution of the NIST analytical results of 
certification analyses.  Plain ASCII files for the constituents may be found at  
https://www-s.nist.gov/srmors/view_detail.cfm?srm=606 (accessed May 2018). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This  can  be
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program:    telephone (301)  975-2200;  fax (301)  948-3730;  e-mail 
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 

possession  is  current. 

SRM 606 

Page 4 of 4 

