National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Report of Investigation 
 
Reference Material® 8013 

 

Gold Nanoparticles, Nominal 60 nm Diameter 

 
This  Reference  Material (RM)  is  intended  primarily  to  evaluate  and  qualify  methodology  and/or  instrument 
performance  related  to  the  physical/dimensional  characterization  of  nanoscale  particles  used  in  pre-clinical 
biomedical research.  The RM may also be useful in the development and evaluation of in vitro assays designed to 
assess  the  biological  response  (e.g.,  cytotoxity,  hemolysis)  of  nanomaterials,  and  for  use  in  interlaboratory  test 
comparisons.  RM 8013 consists of nominally 5 mL of citrate-stabilized Au nanoparticles in an aqueous suspension, 
supplied  in  hermetically  sealed  pre-scored  glass  ampoules  sterilized  by  gamma  irradiation.    A  unit  of  RM 8013 
consists of two 5 mL ampoules.  The suspension contains primary particles (monomers) and a small percentage of 
clusters of primary particles.  
 
Expiration  of  Value  Assignment:    The  reference  values  for  RM 8013  are  valid,  within  the  measurement 
uncertainty  specified,  until  25 October 2018,  provided  the  RM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  the 
instructions given in this report (see “Notice and Warning to Users”).  This report is nullified if the RM is damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of RM:  NIST will monitor this RM over the period of its validity.  If substantive technical changes 
occur  that  affect  the  reference  values  before  the  expiration  of  this  report,  NIST  will  notify  the  purchaser.  
Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
The overall technical coordination for material procurement, processing and measurement activities was conducted 
by V.A. Hackley and J.F. Kelly of the NIST division formerly known as the Ceramics Division. 
 
Reference and informational value measurements were performed at NIST by the following: T.A. Butler, R. Case, 
K.W. Pratt,  L.C. Sander,  and  M.R. Winchester  of  the  NIST  division  formerly  known  as  the  Analytical  Chemistry 
Division;  A.J. Allen,  T.J. Cho,  J. Grobelny,  V.A. Hackley,  D.-I. Kim  and  P. Namboodiri  of  the  NIST  division 
formerly known as the Ceramics Division; J.E. Bonevich and A.J. Shapiro of the NIST division formerly known as 
the Metallurgy Division; M.L. Becker, D.L. Ho, A. Karim and B.M. Vogel of the NIST division formerly known as 
the Polymers Division; B. Ming and A.E. Vladár of the NIST division formerly known as the Precision Engineering 
Division;  L.F. Pease III,  M.J. Tarlov,  D.H. Tsai,  M.R. Zachariah  and  R.A. Zangmeister  of  the  NIST  division 
formerly known as the Process Measurements Division. 
 
Statistical  consultation  on  measurement  design  and  analysis  of  the  reference  value  data  were  performed  by 
A.I. Avilés of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Additional  technical  and  coordination  aspects  were  provided  by  the  following:  R.F. Cook,  W.K. Haller  and 
D.L. Kaiser of the NIST Materials Measurement Science Division. 
 
Office  of  Reference
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  RM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
RM 8013 was developed at the request of the National Cancer Institute (NCI).  Development and production costs 
were subsidized by NCI. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Report Issue Date:  24 July 2015 
Report Revision History on Last Page 

John A. Small, Chief 
Materials Measurement Science Division 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

RM 8013 

 

Page 1 of 10 

 
 

Reference Values:  Reference values are a best estimate of the true value provided by NIST where all known or 
suspected  sources  of  bias  have  not  been  fully  investigated  by  NIST [1].    Dimensional  reference  values  (mean 
particle diameter in solution, as an aerosol and deposited on a substrate) are reported and are based on the following 
measurement  techniques:  atomic  force  microscopy (AFM),  scanning  electron  microscopy (SEM),  transmission 
electron  microscopy (TEM), electrospray-differential  mobility analysis (ES-DMA), dynamic light scattering (DLS) 
and  small-angle  x-ray  scattering (SAXS).    The  corresponding  reference  values  and  expanded  uncertainties  are 
provided in Table 1.  A synopsis of the  methods used to generate reference  values is provided starting on page 7.  
The  measurands  are  the  particle  size  based  on  the  indicated  methods.    The  reference  values  are  metrologically 
traceable to the SI unit for length, expressed as nanometers. 
 

Table 1. Reference Value Mean Size and Expanded Uncertainty(a) 
Average Particle Size (Diameter), in nanometers 

Technique 

 

Analyte Form 

Atomic Force Microscopy 
Scanning Electron Microscopy 
Transmission Electron Microscopy 
Differential Mobility Analysis 
Dynamic Light Scattering 
    backscatter, 173º scattering angle 
    90º scattering angle 
Small-Angle X-ray Scattering 
 

dry, deposited on substrate 
dry, deposited on substrate 
dry, deposited on substrate 
dry, aerosol 
liquid suspension 
 
 
liquid suspension 
 

±  
±  
±  
±  

0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
1.5 

Particle Size (nm) 
 
 55.4  
 54.9  
 56.0  
 56.3  
 
 56.6  
 55.3  
 53.2  
 

1.4 
8.3 
5.3 

±  
±  
±  

 

(a) The expanded uncertainties, U, are calculated as U = kuc, where uc is intended to represent, at the level of one 
standard deviation, the combined standard uncertainty calculated according to the ISO Guide [2].  The coverage 
factor,  k,  for  95 %  expanded  uncertainty  intervals  is  based  on  a  t  multiplier  with  the  appropriate  associated 
degrees of freedom. 

 
Information  Values: 
  Information  values  and  associated  measurement  uncertainties  for  chemical  and 
electrochemical  properties  unrelated  to  particle  size  are  presented  in  Table 2.    NIST  information  values  are 
considered  to  be  of  interest  to  the  RM  user,  but  insufficient  information  is  available  to  assess  adequately  the 
uncertainty  associated  with  the  values  or  a  limited  number  of  analyses  were  performed.    Elemental  and  ion  mass 
fractions  and  electrochemical  properties,  including  pH,  electrolytic  conductivity  and  zeta  potential,  are  listed  in 
Table 2.  An optical absorbance spectrum and asymmetric-flow field flow fractionation (AFFF) trace are provided in 
Figures 1 and 2, respectively.  Material sterility and endotoxin content were assessed.  Electron microscopy images 
are provided in Figure 3.  Particle size histograms are provided in Figures 4 through 7.  Information values cannot be 
used to establish metrological traceability. 

RM 8013 

Page 2 of 10 

Table 2. Information Value Mean and Measurement Uncertainty(a) 
Chemical and Electrochemical Properties 

ertainty 

 

Measurement 

 

Au mass fraction (μg g-1) (b) 
Cl− ion mass fraction (μg g-1) (c) 
citrate ion mass fraction (μg g-1) (c) 
Na mass fraction (μg g-1) (d) 
pH (e) 
electrolytic conductivity, κ (μS cm-1) (f) 
zeta potential (mV) (g) 
electrophoretic mobility (μm cm V-1 s-1) 

Value 

 
 
  51.86   ±  
±  
  36.3  
 < 0.02 
    -- 
  7.30   ±  
±  
 241.6  
 -37.6  
± 
  -2.67   ±  

0.64 
1.2 

0.32 
6.5 
3.0 
0.21 

 

 

(a) For pH,  conductivity  and  Au  mass  fraction,  the  expanded  uncertainty  (95 %  confidence  interval)  is  calculated 
according to the ISO Guide [2].  Other reported uncertainties are two times the standard deviation of replicate 
measurements. 

‘S  are  two  time

(b)  Au bound into nanoparticles was determined from separate  measurements of total Au and Au dissolved in the 
solution  matrix.    Both  measurements  were  made  using  inductively-coupled  plasma  optical  emission 
spectrometry (ICP-OES).    Total  Au  was  measured  after  digestion  of  the  particles  with  a  mixture  of  nitric  and 
hydrochloric acids.  Solution matrix Au was measured after removal of Au particles by ultracentrifugation, and 
was  undetectable  at  the  3σ  detection  limit  corresponding  to  0.07 μg  g-1  in  the  undiluted  supernatant.  The  Au 
mass  fraction  in  the  matrix  was  estimated  as  0.5 times  the  3σ  limit  and  subtracted  from  the  total  Au  mass 
fraction to obtain the reported value for the bound Au mass fraction. 

(c)  Levels of Cl− and citrate (C3H5O(COO)33−) ions were determined in native suspensions by ion chromatography 
with a conductivity detector.  Chloride and citrate ions were identified based on the retention times of reference 
standards.    Chloride  levels  in  the  water  blank  used  to  prepare  calibrants  were  insignificant  for  this  analysis.  
Citrate was not detectable in the water blank.  The levels of Cl− and citrate ions appear to increase slightly as a 
consequence  of  centrifugation,  but  this  effect  has  not  been  quantified.    The  limit  of  detection  for  citrate  is 
estimated to be 0.02 μg g-1; the limit of quantitation is estimated to be 0.06 μg g-1.  Citrate bound to Au particles 
will not be detected by this approach. 

(d) Na  mass  fraction  was  determined  in  the  native  suspension  using  inductively-coupled  plasma  optical  emission 
spectrometry (ICP-OES).  Matrix effects and other factors that may affect metrological validity are unaccounted 
for in this case.  Additionally, Na may leach into solution from the inner surfaces of borosilicate glass ampoules.  
Ongoing  studies  at  NIST  have  shown  that  Na  mass  fractions  in  excess  of  10  μg g-1  may  result  under  acidic 
conditions.    The  proportion  of  the  observed  Na  mass  fraction  that  is  attributable  to  leaching  is  unknown.  
Furthermore, changes in the Na mass fraction over time are unpredictable.  For RM 8013, the Na level detected 
was within the range that can occur as a result of leaching, and therefore the Na level is not reported. 

(e) The pH was determined at 25.0 °C using a combination electrode with ceramic reference junction and a 2 point 

calibration referred to SRM 186g (pH 6.864) and SRM 187e (pH 9.186). 

(f)  Electrolytic  conductivity  was  determined  at  25.0 °C  at  1 kHz  using  a  dip  cell  with  nominal  cell  constant  of 
0.1 cm-1.  The cell constant was determined using SRM 3191 (nominal κ, 100 µS cm-1) and SRM 3192 (nominal 
κ, 500 µS cm-1). 

(g)  Zeta  potential  was  calculated  using  the  Smoluchowski  formula  from  the  mean  d.c.  electrophoretic  mobility 
measured by Doppler velocimetry.  For this purpose, a microelectrophoretic light scattering instrument equipped 
with  a  quartz  capillary  cell  was  used.    Measurements  were  obtained  at  the  cell  stationary  layer  for  native 
suspensions  at  20.0 °C  after  preconditioning  the  cell  with  2 mmol L-1  NaCl.    Instrument  performance  was 
qualified  using  a  vendor  supplied  –50 mV  transfer  standard  referred  to  SRM 1980.    Since  the  Smoluchowski 
formula  is  intended  for  systems  obeying  the  thin  double-layer  approximation,  it  may  not  be  appropriate  for 
RM 8013 and therefore the mobility value is also provided. 

RM 8013 

Page 3 of 10 

Optical Absorbance:  Optical absorbance spectra were obtained using a double-beam spectrophotometer on native 
suspensions.  Measurements were performed using matched quartz cuvettes (10 mm path length) against a filtered 
deionized water reference.  Scan conditions: slit width, 1 nm; scan rate, 240 nm min-1.  The coefficient of variation 
determined  near the plasmon  peak center  was 0.4 %  for spectra obtained  from 6 randomly  selected ampoules.   A 
representative spectrum is presented in Figure 1. 

532 nm

e
c
n
a
b
r
o
s
b
a

1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

)

V

i

(
 
l
a
n
g
s
 
r
o
t
c
e
t
e
d

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

    

400

450

500

550

600

650

700

wavelength (nm)

 

face  plasmon 
Figure 1.  Representative  optical  absorbance  spectrum  for  the  native  suspension,  centered  on  the  surface  plasmon 
resonance peak for Au.  Wavelength of peak maximum is indicated. 
 
 
Asymmetric-Flow  Field  Flow  Fractionation  (AFFF):    This  representative  chromatographic  trace  was  obtained 
with  on-line  static  light  scattering,  UV-vis  diode  array,  and  DLS  detectors  under  the  following  conditions:  native 
sample  diluted  10-fold  in  ultrapure  deionized  water;  mobile  phase:  ultrapure  deionized  water;  membrane:  30 kD 
polyvinylidenedifluoride (PVDF); channel thickness: 350 μm; channel flow: 0.5 mL min–1; cross flow: 1 mL min–1; 
injection volume: 100 μL.  Peak-center retention time is indicated numerically.  Retention time is determined from 
the  endpoint  of  the  focusing  step  following  injection.    Duplicate  measurements  agreed  to  within  0.01 min  peak 
retention.  A representative trace is presented in Figure 2. 

  

7.58 min

  

MALS 90°
DAD 520 nm
z-avg size

  
   

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

100

80

60

40

)

m
n
(
 
e
g
a
r
e
v
a
-
z

retention time (min)

 
Figure 2.  AFFF  retention  trace  showing  detector  response  for  90º  light  scattering  and  520 nm  optical  absorption.  
The z-average hydrodynamic diameter values are given across the peak trace. 
 
 
Sterility  and  Endotoxin  Assessment 1:    Sterility  was  tested  by  plating  RM 8013  on  standard  Luria-Bertani (LB) 
culture  plates.    No  colony  formation  was  observed  after  two  days  of  incubation  on  LB  plates  for  samples  taken 
before or after sterilization with gamma radiation.  Endotoxin was not detected at a level of 2 pg mL-1 in samples 
taken before or after gamma irradiation. 2 
 

 

                                                 

1 Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this report in order to adequately specify the 
experimental  procedure.    Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  National  Institute  of 
Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the 
purpose. 

2 The limulus amoebocyte lysate (LAL) assay was used to detect and measure bacterial endotoxin.  Due to interference 
at  the  detection  wavelength  (405 nm)  used  to  quantify  the  results  of  the  underlying  enzymatic  reaction,  Au  particles  were 
removed  from  the  solution  by  centrifugation  at  20,000 g  prior  to  analysis.    To  test  for  potential  loss  of  endotoxin  due  to  this 
procedure, samples of RM 8013 were spiked with lipopolysaccharide (LPS).  Spiked samples exhibited some retention; detecting 
a small absorbance value when subtracting a high background is a potential significant source of uncertainty for these test results.  
Additionally, this assay cannot exclude the presence of endotoxin previously adsorbed to the Au particles and removed during 
centrifugation.  Samples for analysis were prepared from ampoules randomly selected before and after gamma irradiation. 

RM 8013 

Page 4 of 10 

 
Figure 3.  Combined  SEM  and  TEM  micrographs.    On  left:  image  of  Au  particles  sampled  from  a  single 
representative SEM scan.  On right: high magnification TEM image revealing internal structure and faceting for a 
single Au particle. 
 
 
Size  Distribution  Histograms:    Histograms  generated  by  AFM,  SEM,  TEM  and  ES-DMA  analysis  are  shown 
below in  Figures 4, 5, 6 and 7, respectively.   Binning  was performed at a resolution of  approximately 1 bin nm-1.  
Corresponding data sets were used to derive the reported reference values for these methods. 

 
Electron Microscopy Imaging:  Representative micrographs are presented in Figure 3. 

0

 
 

30

40

20

10

30

60

50

40

t
n
u
o
c

 
 

  

 
  

size (nm)

size (nm)

 

t
n
u
o
c

t
n
u
o
c

100

300

400

200

40

50

30

60

30

45

15

60

50

60

 
 

0

 

0

Figure 5. Particle size histogram generated by SEM analysis. 

Figure 4. Particle size histogram generated by AFM analysis. 

 
 

70

80

 
 

70

80

 

 

 

30

40

50

60

70

80

size (nm)

RM 8013 

Page 5 of 10 

Figure 6. Particle size histogram generated by TEM analysis. 

)

6
0
1
 
x
(
 
t
n
u
o
c

8

6

4

2

0

 
 

 
 

 
 

30

40

50

60

70

80

size (nm)

 

:  allowed  to  freeze

Figure 7.  Particle  size  histogram  generated  by  ES-DMA  analysis.    Bins  containing  counts  attributable  to  salt 
particles have been removed. 
 
NOTICE AND WARNING TO USERS 
 
Handling  and  Storage:    Until  required  for  use,  the  RM  should  be  stored  at  room  temperature  in  its  original 
ampoule and package, and protected from intense direct light or ultraviolet radiation.  Refrigeration is not necessary 
and is discouraged.  Ampoules are best stored long term in a horizontal position.  Settling of Au particles is to be 
expected when the ampoule is left undisturbed for a period of several days or longer, but sediment should resuspend 
without significantly impacting the size distribution.  
 
of 
Caution:  Ampoule contents should not be allowed to freeze, as this will permanently compromise the integrity of 
the material and invalidate reference values.  A color change from red‐pink to purple or clear indicates that the RM 
has been compromised.  Occasionally, a visible black speck will be observed in an ampoule containing an otherwise 
translucent  red‐pink  (i.e.,  normal)  solution;  this  does  not  indicate  the  sample  has  been  compromised;  the  specks 
settle rapidly and can easily be separated from the test material. 
 
Warning:  Not for clinical use or human consumption. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 
 
Prior  to  opening,  the  glass  ampoule  containing  the  RM  should  be  gently  inverted  several  times  to  insure 
homogeneity  and  resuspension  of  any  settled  particles.    Liquid  retained  in  the  upper  portion  of  the  ampoule  (the 
nipple), can be dislodged by gently  flicking the nipple  with forefinger  while tilting the ampoule.   The ampoule is 
pre-scored  and  should  be  opened  by  applying  moderate  pressure  with  one’s  thumb  to  snap  off  the  nipple.    It  is 
recommended that the contents of an ampoule be used the same day as opened.  Clean laboratory sealing film can be 
applied to seal a previously opened ampoule for short term storage.  If it is necessary to use an ampoule over two or 
more  days,  then  certain  precautions  should  be  taken:  opening  the  ampoule  in  a  clean  bench  (HEPA  filtered) 
environment  using  sterile  procedures  (ethanol  rinse),  and  sealing  with  ethanol-rinsed  laboratory  sealing  film 
(optionally, one can transfer the suspension to a clean, sterile plastic or glass vial with a sealing cap), should prolong 
the useful life of opened ampoules for up to 7 days.  Viability after longer term storage cannot be guaranteed, but 
may be possible if these additional precautions are followed. 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS 
 
Material Source and Processing:  The material used to produce RM 8013 was purchased from BB International of 
Cardiff, UK.  A colloidal Au suspension was prepared to NIST specifications using the citrate-reduction method in a 
single 8 L batch at their manufacturing facility in the UK.  The suspension was shipped in 1 L polycarbonate bottles, 
and recombined at NIST in a sterile protein-free 10 L borosilicate glass flask.  Recombination was performed in a 
HEPA-filtered clean bench using sterile procedures.  The suspension was subsequently flame-sealed into Wheaton 
5 mL pre-scored USP Type I glass ampoules using an automated process.  Prior to use, the ampoules were cleaned 
with  high  pressure  deionized  water  and  autoclaved,  then  flushed  with  argon  gas  prior  to  and  during  filling.    The 
sealed ampoules containing the Au suspension were sterilized with cobalt-60 gamma radiation to a minimum dose 
of 31.9 kGy by Neutron Products Inc. of Dickerson, MD. 

RM 8013 

Page 6 of 10 

 
 

Heterogeneity  Assessment:    During  the  filling  process,  ampoules  were  stored  in  boxes  numbered  1  through  11, 
with box number corresponding to fill order.  Heterogeneity testing was performed using measurements of optical 
density (OD) at 520 nm, hydrodynamic size, and relative Au mass fraction. Measurements of OD and hydrodynamic 
size  (determined  by  DLS),  were  performed  on  native  solutions.    For  these  measurements,  two  samples  were 
extracted  from  each  of  11  randomly  selected  ampoules  (one  from  each  box),  for  a  total  of  22  samples  for  each 
method.  The likelihood ratio [3] (to check if a model that ignores the ampoule effect and a model with the ampoule 
effect are similar) and ANOVA tests conclude that ampoules are homogeneous for hydrodynamic size and OD. 
 
Au content was evaluated using inductively-coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry performed on 4 samples 
extracted  gravimetrically  from  each  of  11  randomly  selected  ampoules  (one  from  each  box).    Analysis  followed 
addition of an internal standard, acid digestion, and dilution with high-purity water.  Relative Au mass fraction was 
calculated  as  relative  instrument  sensitivity  values.    Although  likelihood  ratio  and  ANOVA  tests,  for  a  level  of 
confidence  of  95 %,  conclude  that  there  is  statistically  significant  heterogeneity  present,  the  largest  and  smallest 
ICP-OES  relative  sensitivity  values  differ  by  only  approximately  2 %.    Thus,  the  magnitudes  of  the  observed 
heterogeneities are probably negligible in relation to the intended use of this material. 
 
Value  Assignment  and  Uncertainty  Analysis:    Analyses  to  establish  reference  values  were  conducted  at  NIST 
using  best  practices  as  determined  independently  for  each  measurement  method.    Analyses  were  performed  on 
replicate (typically two) subsamples drawn from randomly selected (typically four) ampoules of material; subsample 
sizes and methods were left to the discretion of the expert analyst.  For AFM and SEM, the reference values are the 
means of the measurement results, and the uncertainty level is based on a confidence interval approach [2], with an 
expanded  uncertainty  calculated  as  U = kuc,  where  the  combined  uncertainty (uc)  is  calculated  as  the  estimated 
standard  deviation  of  the  mean  and  the  coverage  factor  (k)  is  the  expansion  factor  of  2  based  on  the  Student’s 
t multiplier  associated  with  a  level  of  confidence  of  95 %.    For TEM,  ES-DMA,  and  DLS,  reference  values  were 
calculated from the ampoule means and the uncertainty level is based on a prediction interval approach [4], where 
 (N is 
the combined uncertainty is calculated as the standard deviation of the ampoule means multiplied by
the number of ampoules analyzed) and the coverage factor is based on a t multiplier with N-1 degrees of freedom, 
for  a  95 %  expanded  uncertainty  interval.    For  SAXS,  the  restricted  maximum  likelihood (REML)  estimation 
method [5] was used to fit a linear mixed-effects model [6] with average size, between-instrument variability, and 
within-instrument variability as parameters.  The REML estimate for the average size is the reference value and the 
REML  estimates  for  the  variation  of  results  between-  and  within-instruments  are  combined  using  a  root  sum  of 
squares to obtain a combined standard uncertainty, uc [2].  The expanded uncertainty displayed is a confidence limit 
calculated as U = kuc, where k is the expansion factor associated with a level of confidence of 95 %. 
 
METHODS FOR REFERENCE VALUE MEASUREMENTS 
 
Atomic  Force  Microscopy  (AFM):    AFM  probes  the  surface  forces  between  a  cantilever  tip  and  the  sample 
deposited on a flat substrate.  The tip is rastered over the analysis area producing a 3D topographic image.  Height 
measurements  can  be  obtained  with  sub-nanometer  precision.    A  Veeco  Multimode  AFM  was  used  for 
measurements.  Height measurements were calibrated using a silicon step-height transfer artifact (SH70-C19-R19) 
with a value of 68.9 nm ± 0.7 nm (NIST Calibrated-AFM, Precision Engineering Division) following the prescribed 
procedure  for  calibration.    Intermediate  contact  (“tapping”)  mode  was  used  with  a  Veeco  RTESP  phosphorus (n) 
doped  silicon  cantilever  for  imaging  (resonance  frequency  300 kHz,  spring  constant  40 N  m-1).    Atomically  flat 
polycrystalline Au on mica was used as a substrate in order to provide a consistent baseline for size measurements 
with minimal interference from surface roughness. 
 
To  prepare  samples  for  analysis,  approximately  1 mL  aliquots  of  native  suspension  from  2  randomly  selected 
ampoules  were placed into 1.5 mL  microtubes and centrifuged at 5 krpm  for  5 min.   A  portion of the supernatant 
from each microtube was then removed and replaced with deionized water to obtain a 3-fold dilution of the native 
suspension.  No change in stability of the suspension was observed during this process.  A droplet of each diluted 
suspension  was  then  placed  on  the  Au  substrate  and  dried  at  70 °C.    The  maximum  height  with  reference  to  the 
baseline substrate was recorded as the size (diameter) of the Au particle.  Images were collected from different areas 
of the deposited substrate.  Height profiles representing 300 particles from one ampoule and 100 particles from the 
second ampoule were individually analyzed to acquire the size distribution and mean. 
 
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM):  In SEM the sample is imaged using low-energy secondary electrons in a 
process that employs a raster-scanned primary beam.  An FEI Helios Dual-Beam SEM was used for imaging, with 
the following conditions: 15 keV accelerating voltage, 86 pA beam current, 30 μs beam dwell time for each image 
pixel, and 3.5 mm sample working distance.  Image contrast and brightness were set so that a good balance between 
detail and distinction from background was achieved.  For scale calibrations of X and Y directions a VLSI Standards 
NanoLattice  sample  was  used.    This  artifact  was  calibrated  on  NIST’s  Calibrated  Atomic  Force  Microscope 

N11+

RM 8013 

Page 7 of 10 

(C-AFM) by R.G. Dixson of the NIST Precision Engineering Division, who determined a pitch value of 99.98 nm 
with an uncertainty of 1.5 nm (k = 2).  Samples were imaged at 250 k× magnification.  A digital capture resolution 
of (2048 × 1886) pixels was used for all images.  Under these conditions, a nominal 60 nm particle will yield an area 
of roughly (100 × 100) pixels. 
 
)  was
The software package ImageJ v1.37 (available from the National Institutes of Health: http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/) was 
used for image processing and data analysis.  The Otsu threshold algorithm  was implemented to produce a binary 
image in which the particles are white and the background is black.  The outlines of particles as traced by ImageJ 
were  used  to  check  the  quality  of  the  particle  separation  from  their  background  in  order  to  discriminate  between 
single  particles  and  aggregates.    The  area  data  for  each  numbered  particle  as  obtained  from  ImageJ  were  first 
converted  to  an  effective  spherical  diameter  value  in  pixel  units,  which  was  then  converted  to  length  units (nm) 
based on the pitch calibration.  A total of 425 particles were analyzed on samples prepared from 3 randomly selected 
ampoules. 
 
Substrates  were  prepared  by  placing  a  drop  of  aminopropyldimethylethoxysilane  (ADMES)  on  a  clean 
5 mm × 5 mm  Si  substrate  cleaved  from  a  100 mm  diameter  wafer.    The  untreated  wafer  supports  a  thin,  native 
oxide  layer.    The  ADMES  was  allowed  to  react  for  2 h  to  6 h,  after  which  excess  silane  was  rinsed  off  with 
isopropanol followed by deionized  water.   For analysis, the Au particles  were then deposited onto the derivatized 
substrate by contacting with a droplet of native suspension for a period of 1 h to 2 h.  The deposited substrate was 
then rinsed  with isopropanol followed by deionized  water, and dried by  gently blowing  with filtered dry  nitrogen 
prior to analysis.  Samples were analyzed as deposited; a conductive coating was not required. 
 
Transmission  Electron  Microscopy  (TEM):    TEM  measures  the  projected  image  of  particles  deposited  onto  an 
electron-transparent  substrate.    Internal  structure,  as  well  as  surface  morphology,  may  contribute  to  the  image 
appearance.  A Philips EM400T TEM, operating at 120 kV and equipped with an Olympus Cantega bottom mount 
CCD camera, was used for measurement of deposited samples.  Frames were captured at an exposure time of 2 s.  
The  magnification  of  the  microscope/camera  system  was  calibrated  using  negatively  stained  catalase  crystals  and 
analyzed by the CRISP software package (http://www.calidris-em.com/).  TEM images were analyzed in the IgorPro 
(http://www.wavemetrics.com/)  software  package  using  custom  macros  written  by  B.M. Vogel  of  the  NIST 
Polymers  Division.    Particle  size  was  determined  by  measuring  the  contiguous  area  of  pixels  that  fall  within  the 
threshold set for a particular micrograph.  This area was then used to determine the equivalent diameter assuming a 
spherical particle.  Therefore, the average particle size does not consider any pronounced faceting.  The circularity 
Aπ   (where  P  is  the  particle  perimeter  and  A  is  its  area),  approaches  1  for  an  ideal  circle.  
value,  defined  as 
Particles  with  circularities  of  6  or  higher  were  not  counted  to  minimize  aggregate/artifact  inclusion  in  the  size 
analysis.  
 
The substrate consisted of a 3 mm Cu grid with a 10 nm continuous film of silicon monoxide that was functionalized 
with aminopropydimethylethoxysilane (ADMES).  The substrate was prepared by contacting a commercial grid with 
about 20 µL of ADMES while sealed in a glass vial to trap vapor and prevent evaporation.  After 1 h the grids were 
removed  and  dip-washed  in  ethanol  and  allowed  to  dry.    To  prepare  a  sample  for  analysis,  one  droplet  (roughly 
8 µL) of native Au suspension was placed on a functionalized grid presented on a stud suspended above a reservoir 
containing water.  A cover was placed over the assembly to prevent evaporation of the Au suspension.  After 1 h the 
grids were dip-washed in distilled water and then ethanol to remove any remaining suspension.  The grids were then 
dried at room temperature prior to measurement.  A total of 3030 particles  were analyzed on grids prepared from 
4 randomly selected ampoules. 
 
Electrospray – Differential  Mobility Analysis (ES-DMA):  In ES-DMA  the liquid  suspension is  first conveyed 
into the gas phase using electrospray ionization.  The resulting droplets pass through a neutralizing chamber where 
collisions with charged ions reduce the charge to a modified Boltzmann distribution [7].  Consequently, most of the 
positively charged particles left after the droplets evaporate possess a single net charge.  As they dry, residual salts 
or other nonvolatile impurities encrust the surface.  Within the analysis chamber charged particles are attracted to a 
negatively  biased  center  electrode,  while  being  dragged  along  by  a  carrier  gas.    Particles  for  which  the  electrical 
force balances the drag force pass through a collection slit, after which a condensation particle counter enumerates 
the number of particles passing through the detector per cubic centimeter of gas flow.  Stepping through the voltage 
yields a particle size distribution.  The experimental system used in this study consisted of an electrospray aerosol 
generator  (Model  3480,  TSI  Inc.),  a  differential  mobility  analyzer  (Model  3080n,  TSI  Inc.)  and  a  condensation 
particle counter (Model 3025, TSI Inc.).  The following conditions were used: capillary diameter, nominally 25 μm; 
electrospray voltage, 1.67 kV to 2.78 kV; CO2 pressure and flow rate, 6.89 × 104 Pa and 0.2 L min-1; air pressure and 
flow rate, 2.55 × 104 Pa and 1.0 L min-1; sheath/carrier gas flow rate, 10 L min-1; flow entering the particle counter 
(supplemented by filtered air), 1.5 L min-1.  The baseline cut off value was set at 30 counts to ensure clear separation 
between peaks and to account for baseline noise.  

2 4P

RM 8013 

Page 8 of 10 

 
Conversion of DMA voltages to equivalent diameters and generation of the particle size distribution were achieved 
using equations and parameters specified by the commercial vendor of the ES-DMA instrumentation.  To account 
for the thickness of any nonvolatile salts encrusted on the surface of the particles, the mode diameter of the salt peak 
was  determined  and  subtracted  from  the  subsequent  particle  sizes,  after  which  the  number  average  diameter  was 
calculated for each sample. 
 
From each of 4 randomly selected ampoules, 900 μL of native suspension was transferred to low-binding microfuge 
tubes and centrifuged for 12 min at 7.6 krpm.  Afterwards, 850 μL of clear supernatant was removed and 500 μL of 
2 mmol L-1 ammonium acetate solution at pH 8 was added to the tube.  A vortex mixer was used to re-homogenize 
samples, which were then subjected to ES-DMA. 
 
Dynamic  Light Scattering (DLS):  DLS, also known as  photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS) and quasi-elastic 
light  scattering (QELS)  is  a  technique  in  which  the  random  fluctuation  of  scattered  light  from  a  suspension  of 
Brownian particles dispersed in a liquid medium is measured on a timescale of μs.  Intensity fluctuations arise from 
the size-dependent thermally  induced  motion of the particles and the refractive contrast  between the particles and 
medium.    Photon  counts  are  collected  and  then  processed  by  a  correlator  to  generate  an  autocorrelation 
function (ACF)  expressed  as  the  correlation  coefficient  versus  correlator  delay  time.    Backscatter  DLS 
measurements were performed using a Malvern Zetasizer-Nano ZS.  Measurement parameters were as follows: laser 
wavelength,  633 nm  (He-Ne);  scattering  angle,  173º;  number  of  sub-runs  (typically),  12;  50 %  of  sub-runs  with 
highest  intensity  were  removed  as  a  dust  rejection  filter,  yielding  a  total  measurement  duration  for  analysis 
(typically) of 60 s;  measurement temperature, 20 ºC ± 0.1 ºC;  medium  viscosity, 1.0031 mPa s,  medium refractive 
index,  1.330.    Measurements  at  90º  scattering  angle  were  performed  using  a  Malvern  Zetasizer  3000HS  under 
conditions  identical  to  those  described  for  backscatter  measurements,  except  as  follows:  automatic  dust  rejection 
routine enabled, 200 μm aperture used before detector, total duration (with sub-runs) typically 300 s to 360 s.  ACFs 
were fit using the cumulants method as defined by IS0 13321:1996(E) [8].  Data points used in the analysis  were 
obtained by selecting a sub-set of points logarithmically spaced (weighted quadratically) and normalizing these by 
subtracting  the  baseline.    A  last  point  cut-off  at  10 %  of  signal  was  applied  to  the  fit.    From  this  analysis  the 
z-average effective-sphere hydrodynamic diameter and polydispersity index (PI) were calculated.  Qualification of 
instrument performance was checked using NIST SRM 1964 (Nominal 60 nm Diameter Polystyrene Spheres). 
 
All sample preparation steps were performed within a HEPA-filtered clean bench.  For analysis, the native material 
was  diluted  10-fold  into  2  mmol L-1  NaCl  solution;  preliminary  tests  indicated  a  concentration-dependence  of  the 
measured size at lower dilution factors.  Diluted Au suspension was passed through a 0.45 μm PVDF membrane that 
exhibits  low  affinity  for  Au.    The  diluted  sample  was  loaded  into  a  quartz  microcuvette  (3 mm  path  length)  for 
backscatter  measurements  or  a  glass  cuvette  (10 mm  path  length)  for  90º  measurements.    For  each  instrument, 
5 replicate  measurements  were  performed  on  each  sample  and  the  mean  result  was  recorded.    Two  aliquots 
(samples) were tested from each of 4 randomly selected ampoules for a total of 8 measurement results (40 individual 
measurements) from which the reference value was determined. 
 
characterized  by  a  relaxat 
For measurements at 90º, observation of a secondary decay in the correlation function characterized by a relaxation 
ym  or  another  yet  unidentified
time  of  between  20 μs  and  40 μs,  may  indicate  the  presence  of  rotational  diffusion  or  another  yet  unidentified 
artifact.  Rotational contributions to the ACF could bias the results toward smaller sizes, but the magnitude of this 
bias on the z-average diameter is difficult to quantify. 
 
Small-Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS):  In the SAXS technique, when a well-collimated, monochromatic beam of 
hard X-rays passes through a material, any namometer-range inhomogeneities in the electron density scatter a small 
component  of  the  beam  into  a  small  solid  angle  around  the  incident  direction.    Scattered  intensity,  I,  is  typically 
, where λ is the wavelength and 
presented as a function of the modulus of the scattering vector, 
θ  is  the  scattering  angle.    SAXS  data  contains  information  regarding  the  size,  shape,  concentration  and  spatial 
arrangement of nanoscale inhomogeneities (or particles) present.  
 
SAXS measurements were performed on two instruments that rely on different sample and x-ray optic geometries 
and  x-ray  sources.    In  the  first  case,  measurements  were  obtained  using  a  customized  pin-hole  collimated  SAXS 
instrument (Rigaku RA-MICR007) with a Mo rotating anode source (Rigaku, Mo-Kα, λ = 0.73 Å) and a 2D image 
plate detector.  The configuration produced a beam diameter of 300 µm at the sample plane and provided a Q-range 
from 0.01 Å-1 to 2.0 Å-1.  Native suspensions from 2 randomly selected ampoules were loaded into static liquid cells 
with a path length of 2 mm.  Two samples were analyzed from each ampoule along with a filtered deionized water 
blank.    The  data  were  reduced  by  radially  averaging  the  2D  detector  image  and  normalizing  the  data  to  the 
acquisition time. Q was calibrated using silver behenate powder [10], and data were converted to absolute intensity 
by normalizing with a glassy carbon reference sample (type 2B from Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National 
Laboratory).  The reduced I(Q) data were fit with a hard-sphere model that accounts for polydispersity in the spheres 

)
4
π λ

(
θ

sin

Q

=

2

(

)

RM 8013 

Page 9 of 10 

with  a  Schulz  distribution  using  software  available  from  the  NIST  Center  for  Neutron  Research [11].    The  mean 
particle diameter was determined from a χ-parameter minimized Levenberg-Marquardt fitting. 
 
In  the  second  case,  measurements  were  obtained  using  the  synchrotron-based  double-crystal  Bonse-Hart 
Ultra-SAXS instrument [11] at sector 32-ID of the Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory [12].  In 
the  configuration  used,  this  instrument  provided  a  Q-range  from  0.0001 Å-1  to  1 Å-1  and  absolute  intensity 
calibration  by  primary  methods.    Raw  data  were  collected  in  slit-smeared  configuration  at  a  beam  energy  of 
11.5 keV  (λ=1.078  Å).    Scattering  curves  were  corrected  for  background/matrix  scattering  by  subtracting  an 
appropriate water blank measurement.  The slit-smeared scattered intensity data, I(Q), were analyzed within the Igor 
software platform with an entropy maximization method [13] incorporating a spherical form factor.  The macro is 
available as part of the Irena macro package on the APS web site (http://usaxs.xor.aps.anl.gov/index.html).  Native 
suspensions from 2 randomly selected ampoules were loaded into static liquid cells with a path length of 1 mm.  The 
remaining suspension from these ampoules  was combined and loaded into a capillary flow-cell (mean path length 
1.31 mm)  equipped  with  a  peristaltic  pump,  for  analysis  of  the  material  under  flowing  conditions;  flow  improves 
statistical  sampling  and  eliminates  potential  issues  related  to  x-ray  beam  damage,  bubble  formation  or  particle 
settling.  The beam size used for static cells was 0.4 mm × 0.4 mm and for the flow cell 0.4 mm × 0.8 mm. 
 
A robust reference value is obtained by combining results from these two instruments to produce a single value for 
mean  diameter  that  incorporates  uncertainties  due  to  variations  in  instrumentation,  sample  cell,  x-ray  source,  and 
choice  of  fitting  algorithm.    The  reference  value  was  calculated  from  the  mean  primary  component  peak  values 
generated by fitting the I(Q) data resulting from each measurement with the assumption of a hard sphere. 
 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]   May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment 
of  Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136;  U.S. Government 
Printing  Office:    Washington, DC  (2000);  available  at:  http://www.nist.gov/srm/publications.cfm  (accessed 
July 2015). 

[2]   JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data - Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement; 
(ISO GUM 1995  with  Minor  Corrections),  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology (JCGM)  (2008); 
available 
(accessed 
July 2015); see also Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of 
NIST  Measurement  Results;  NIST Technical  Note 1297, U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC 
(1994); available at http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed July 2015). 

http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf 

at 

[3]   Tamhane,  A.C.;  Dunlop,  D.D.;  Statistics  and  Data  Analysis:  From  Elementary  to  Intermediate;  1st  ed., 

Prentice Hall: Englewood Cliffs, NJ (2000). 

[4]   Levenson, L.M.; Banks, D.L.; Eberhardt, K.R.; Gill, M.S.; Guthrie, W.F.; Liu, H.K.; Vangel, M.G.; Yen, J.H.; 

). 
md.  Technol. 
Zhang, N.F.; J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., Vol. 105, pp. 571-579 (2000). 
Applied  Linear  Statistical  Models 

[5]   Neter, J.; Kutner, M.H.; Nachtsheim, C.J.; Wasserman, W.; Applied Linear Statistical Models; 4th ed., Irwin: 

- 

Chicago, IL (1996). 

Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., Vol. 111, pp. 257-312 (2006). 
ISO; Particle size analysis - Photon correlation spectroscopy; IS0 13321:1996(E); International Organization 
for Standardization: Genève, Switzerland (1996). 

[6]   Searle,  S.R.;  Casella,  G.;  McCulloch,  C.E.;  Variance  Components;  New  York:  John  Wiley  (1992). 
[7]   Pinheiro, J.C.; Bates, D.M.; Mixed-Effects Models in S and S-PLUS; New York: Springer (2000). 
[8]   Mulholland,  G.W.;  Donnelly,  M.K.;  Hagwood,  C.R.;  Kukuck,  S.R.;  Hackley,  V.A.;  Pui,  D.Y.H.;  J.  Res. 
 
[9]  
 
[10]   Gilles, R., Keiderling, U. and Wiedenmann, A. J. Appl. Cryst., Vol. 31, pp. 957-959 (1998). 
[11]   Kline, S.R., J. Appl. Cryst., Vol. 39, pp. 895-900 (2006). 
[12]   Ilavsky, J.; Allen, A.J.; Long, G.G.; Jemian, P.R.; Rev. Sci. Instrum., Vol. 73, pp. 1660-1662 (2002). 
[13]   Use  of  the  Advanced  Photon  Source  was  supported  by  the  U.  S.  Department  of  Energy,  Office  of  Science, 

Office of Basic Energy Sciences, under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357. 

[14]   Potton, J.A.; Daniell, G.J.; Rainford, B.D.; J. Appl. Cryst. Vol. 21, pp. 663-668 (1988). 
 
 
  
Report  Revision  History:    24 July 2015  (Change  of  expiration  date;  editorial  changes);  09 November 2012  (Extension  of  expiration  period; 
editorial changes); 13 December 2007 (Original certificate date). 
   
 
 
 
Users  of  this  RM  should  ensure  that  the  Report  of  Investigation  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
(301) 948-3730; 
telephone 
accomplished  by 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

contacting 

fax 

RM 8013 

Page 10 of 10 

