 

 
 

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

Report of Investigation 
 
Reference Material 8091 

Scanning Electron Microscope Sharpness Standard  
 

Serial No.  SAMPLE 

 
 
 
This  Reference  Material  (RM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  checking  the  sharpness  performance  of  scanning 
electron microscopes.  It is supplied as a small (2 mm × 2 mm) diced semiconductor chip.  This sample is capable of 
being  mounted  directly  onto  a  wafer,  wafer  piece,  or  specimen  stub  for  insertion  into  a  laboratory  or  wafer 
inspection scanning electron microscope (SEM).  The chip can also be mounted onto a ‘drop-in’ wafer type sample 
holder.1  RM 8091 is fully compatible with state-of-the-art integrated circuit technology.  
 
Description of RM Unit:  Each RM 8091 chip specimen is mounted on gel-pack inside a plastic box that, in turn, is 
stored inside a foam lined wooden box to protect it from damage and to keep particle contamination to a minimum.  
The utmost care should be taken in handling and mounting this specimen.  One floppy disk containing two image 
files  and  one  copy  each  of  four  published  articles  are  included  with  each  RM  8091  unit.    The  first  file  is  a 
well-focused and stigmatic image (focused); the second file is an image with intentionally induced astigmatism in 
the  image  (astigmatic).    These  files  are  the  ones  used  to  develop  the  following  documentation  included  with  this 
Report  of  Investigation:    Postek,  M.T.  and  Vladar, A.E.,  “Image  Sharpness  Measurement  in  Scanning  Electron 
Microscopy–Part  I,”  SCANNING  Vol.  20,  1-9  (1998);  Vladar,  A.E.,  Postek,  M.T.,  and  Davidson,  M.P.,  “Image 
Sharpness  Measurement  in  Scanning  Electron  Microscopy–Part  II,”  SCANNING  Vol.  20,  24-34  (1998);  Zhang, 
N.F., Postek, M.T., Larrabee, R.D., Vladar, A.E., Keery, W.J., and Jones, S.N., “Image Sharpness Measurement in 
Scanning  Electron  Microscopy–Part  III,”  SCANNING  Vol.  21,  246-252  (1999);  Vladar,  A.E.,  Postek,  M.T., 
Zhang, N.F.,  Larrabee,  R.D.,  Jones,  S.N.,  and  Hajdaj,  R.E.,  “Reference  Material  8091:  New  Scanning  Electron 
Microscope Sharpness Standard,” SPIE Microlithography (2001). 
 
The  technical  direction  for  this  reference  material  was  provided  by  M.T.  Postek  and  A.E.  Vladar  of  the  NIST 
Precision Engineering Division.  Acknowledgment is also given for the technical assistance provided by N.F. Zhang 
of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division and R.D. Larrabee, S.N. Jones, and W.J. Keery of the NIST Precision 
Engineering Division. 
 
The  support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  RM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Standard  Reference 
Materials Program by N.M. Trahey. 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Report Issue Date:  05 July 2001 
 

John Rumble, Jr., Acting Chief 
Standard Reference Materials Program 

Dennis A. Swyt, Chief 
 Precision Engineering Division 

te, VY 

—  XX.

                                                           

1Aluminum wafer drop-in type sample holders are available for purchase with this RM in two sizes, 150 mm (6 in) D 
and  200 mm  (8  in)  D.  The  holders  are  identified  as  RM  9951  and  RM  9952,  respectively,  and  can  be  ordered  with  RM 8091 
through the NIST SRM Program Sales Office. 

Page 1 of 4 

RM 8091  

  

 

 

 

 
Introduction:  All SEMs, whether they are in a laboratory or on the production line, slowly lose performance as the 
instruments are used.  Loss in image quality also means loss in measurement quality.  Loss of performance is due to 
a  number  of  contributing  factors,  including  misalignment,  contamination,  and  increases  in  source  diameter.  
Identifying  a  loss  in  “sharpness”  is  one  way  to  recognize  this  performance  decrease [1,2].    RM  8091  is  intended 
primarily for use in routinely checking the sharpness performance of SEMs.  It is designed to be used in conjunction 
with the NIST/SPECTEL SEM Monitor Program [3], the NIST Kurtosis Program [4], the University of Tennessee 
SMART Program [5], or the analytical procedures proposed by Fanget et al. [6].  
 
General Discussion:  Fully automated or semi-automated SEMs are now commonly used in the laboratory and in 
semiconductor production and other forms of manufacturing.  Testing and proving that the instrument is performing 
at  a  satisfactory  level  of  sharpness  is  an  important  aspect  of  quality  control.    In  industrial  applications,  such  as 
automated  online  semiconductor  production,  users of SEM  metrology  instruments  want  to  have  these instruments 
function without human intervention for long periods of time.  To accomplish that, there needs to be some simple 
criterion, or indication, of when an SEM needs servicing or other attention.  At the present time, no self-testing is 
incorporated  into  the  majority  of  these  instruments  to  verify  that  the  instrument  is  operating  at  a  satisfactory 
performance  level.    Therefore,  there  is  a  growing  realization  of  the  need  for  the  development  of  a  procedure  for 
periodic performance testing. 
 
A degradation of the sharpness of the image of a suitable test object is one of several possible indicators of the need 
for  maintenance.    Postek  and  Vladar  [1]  published  the  fundamental  philosophy  and  a  procedure  based  on  this 
sharpness  principle.    The  basic  procedure has  subsequently  been  refined  into  a  user-friendly,  stand-alone  analysis 
system [2,3].  This concept is based on the objective characterization of the spatial Fourier transform of the SEM 
image of a test object for this purpose and the development of appropriate analytical algorithms for characterizing 
sharpness.    The  main  idea,  as  put  forth  in  those  papers,  is  that  an  instrument  can  be  objectively  tested  in  an 
automated manner, and the procedure described therein is one possible solution, and the solution provided as one 
approach to the problem.  Zhang et al. [4,7] presented an alternative statistical measurement approach known as the 
multivariate  kurtosis.    Recently,  Joy  [5]  developed  SMART  routines  to  measure  instrument  performance  as  well.  
Each  of  these  methods  can  successfully  measure  the  sharpness  of  SEM  images  using  an  appropriate  test  sample.  
RM  8091 was  primarily  designed for use with  the  current  SEM  Monitor  program  [3];  however,  this  SRM  can  be 
used with the other methods described above.  
 
NOTE on the Sharpness of SEM Images:  It is known that the low frequency changes in the video signal contain 
information about the large features, and the high frequency changes carry information of finer details.  When an 
SEM image has fine details at a given magnification, namely, there are more high frequency changes in it, it is said 
to  be  sharper.    A  procedure  based  on  the  Fourier  transform  technique  on  SEM  images  that  is  capable  of  high-
resolution operation, was proposed by Postek and Vladar [1].  Procedures based on the Fourier transform technique 
can also be found in References [8-10].  Because SEM images are composed of two-dimensional arrays of data, the 
two-dimensional  Fourier  transform  generates  two-dimensional  spatial  frequency  spectra.    Based  on  the  computed 
spatial frequency spectra of selected SEM images, it can be observed that when one SEM image is visually sharper 
than  a  second  image,  the  high  spatial  frequency  components  of  the first  image  are  larger  than  that  of  the  second.  
Zhang  et  al.  [4,7,11]  have  published  an  alternative  statistical  analysis  method  based  on  the  Fourier  transform  of 
SEM images.  This method is in the public domain and can be adapted for use by any interested party. 
 
RM 8091:  RM 8091 is one type of a class of samples appropriate for testing the sharpness of SEMs.  The “ideal” 
sample  for  the  sharpness  evaluation  would  have  diversified  size  features  with  exactly  known  structure  in  all 
directions  and  dimension  ranges.    This  type  of  sample  would  be  “fractal–like,”  allowing  the  user  to  measure 
accurately the geometric parameters of the primary electron beam.  Because no such sample exists, the only choice 
is to find or produce artifacts that, at least in the most important magnification ranges, have satisfactory structure.   

~~  ™|  7

RM 8091  

 

Page 2 of 4 

 

 

 
Beyond  the  geometry  requirement,  the  sample  must  yield  reasonably  noiseless  images  with  good  contrast  in  the 
upper magnification range.  A number of different types of samples have been tested for their applicability to the 
sharpness technique.  The conclusion is that the following characteristics should be present in any sample used for 
determination of sharpness. 
 
1.  The sample must be able to be formed or placed on or into a semiconductor wafer. 
2.  Because  the  technique  is  used  in  automated  wafer  fabrication  instrumentation,  the  sample  must  be  able  to 

approximate the product being viewed. 

3.  The  specimen  must  be  solid  to  avoid  any  possible  particle  contamination  of  the  semiconductor  wafer  during 
processing.  Therefore, latex spheres or zinc oxide powder (common SEM standards) are eliminated from the 
possibilities. 

4.  The sample cannot be a source of doping material.  Many semiconductor wafer-processing facilities are trying 
to  avoid  any  use  of  specimens  containing  gold  because  of  the  fear  of  unwanted  doping  of  silicon  wafers.  
Therefore, samples, such as gold–on–carbon, are also eliminated as potential samples.  

 

 

 
Figure  1.    RM  8091  Sample.    Etched  grass;  (a)  SEM  image  of  a  silicon  sample,  “grass,”  that  is  a  result  of 
preferential  masking  during  the  reactive  ion  etching.    (b)  An  AFM  image  that  illustrates  the  three-dimensional 
structure of the grass sample.  (Field width = 180 nm). 
 
The etching artifact “grass” meets the major characteristics of the evaluation sample as described above and can be 
used for both laboratory and online instrumentation (Figure 1).  A quantity of the grass samples was developed in 
collaboration with B.L. Newell, formerly of Texas Instruments, Dallas, TX.  The grass sample was selected as the 
sample of choice, although other types of materials were explored by Postek et al. [12] for suitability as a sharpness 
standard  sample.    Throughout  all  the  testing,  the  original  targeted  grass  material  was  always  the  specimen 
demonstrated to be the best for the purpose.  The actual production of an SEM specimen with a surface structure 
containing higher spatial frequencies than the imaging capabilities of good quality, present day SEMs is not trivial.  
Several different approaches were evaluated and the most promising always remained this etching artifact.  Attempts 
to generate a larger quantity of the grass samples or other similarly suitable substitute were unsuccessful; therefore, 
the original limited quantity of artifacts were diced into approximately 2 mm × 2 mm size chips for this release as 
RM  8091.    At  the  magnifications  used  for  analysis  of  the  instrument  sharpness,  there  are  over  1  million  sites 
available.  

RM 8091  

 

Page 3 of 4 

 

 
Specimen  Contamination:    The  deposition  of  contamination  on  the  surface  of  any  specimen  in  the  SEM  is  a 
pervasive  problem.    The  surface  roughness  of  RM  8091  makes  this  standard  less  susceptible  to  the  effects  of 
contamination.  However, as with any SEM inspection, care must be taken to always operate the instrument on a 
clean area and not dwell too long on any particular area of the RM 8091 surface.  
 
Conclusions:  RM 8091 has been developed as a usable artifact for the testing of sharpness of an SEM, whether the 
instrument is used in the laboratory or the production environment.  The surface structure of this material is designed 
to have greater spatial frequencies than can be imaged by the SEM under evaluation.  Therefore, the analysis of the 
high spatial frequency content of the SEM images of the structure on these images can form the basis of measuring 
the SEM sharpness capabilities.  It has been found convenient and fast to perform this analysis by examination of 
the two-dimensional Fourier transform of the SEM image.  It is anticipated that the use of RM 8091, along with an 
appropriate  imaging  analysis,  will  lead  to  a  simple  quantitative  criterion  to  determine  when  an  SEM  needs 
adjustment and/or maintenance.  A secondary use of this RM is for the evaluation of the deposition of contamination 
by the SEM electron beam. 
 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Postek, M.T. and Vladar, A.E., “SEM Sharpness Evaluation Using the Sharpness Criterion,” Proceedings SPIE 

2725, pp. 504-514, (1996). 

SCANNING 20, pp. 1-9, (1998). 

[2]  Postek,  M.T.  and  Vladar,  A.E.,  “Image  Sharpness  Measurement  in  Scanning  Electron  Microscopy-Part  I,” 

[3]  Vladar,  A.E.,  Postek,  M.T.,  and  Davidson,  M.P.,  “Image  Sharpness  Measurement  in  Scanning  Electron 

Microscopy-Part II,” SCANNING 20, pp. 24-34, (1998). 

[4]  Zhang,  N.F,  Postek,  M.T.,  and  R.D.  Larrabee,  “Image  Sharpness  Measurement  in  Scanning  Electron 

[5] 

Microscopy-Part III. Kurtosis,” SCANNING 21, pp. 256-262, (1999). 
Joy,  D.C.,  “SMART  –  Routines  to  Measure  SEM  Resolution  and  Performance,”  SCANNING  22(2), 
pp. 110-111, (2000). 

[6]  Fanget,  G.L.,  Martin,  H.H.,  and  Florin,  B.,  “Survey  of  Scanning  Electron  Microscopes  Using  Quantitative 

Resolution Evaluation,” SPIE Proceedings 3050, pp. 80-92, (1997). 

[7]  Zhang,  N.F.,  Postek,  M.T.,  Larrabee,  R.D.,  and  Vladar,  A.E.,  “Multivariate  Kurtosis  for  Measuring  Image 
Sharpness,” Proceedings of the 15th International Workshop on Statistical Modeling: New Trends in Statistical 
Modeling, pp. 529-532, (2000). 

[8]  Ong, K.H., Phang, J.C.H., and Thong, J.T.L., “A Robust Focusing and Astigmatism Correction Method for the 

Scanning Electron Microscope,” SCANNING 19, pp. 553-563, (1998). 

[9]  Ong, K.H., Phang, J.C.H., and Thong, J.T.L., “A Robust Focusing and Astigmatism Correction Method for the 
Scanning Electron Microscope - Part III: An Improved Technique,” SCANNING 20, pp. 357-368, (1998). 
[10]  Dodson,  T.A.  and  Joy,  D.C.,  “Fast  Fourier  Transform  Technique  for  Measuring  SEM  Resolution,”  12th 

[11]  Zhang,  N.F.,  Postek,  M.T.,  and  R.D.  Larrabee,  “Statistical  Measure  for  the  Sharpness  of  the  SEM  Image,” 

Proceedings of ICEM, pp. 406-407, (1990). 

Proceedings SPIE 3050, pp. 375-387, (1997). 

[12]  Postek,  M.T.,  Vladar,  A.E.,  Zhang,  N.F.,  and  Larrabee,  R.D.,  “Potentials  of  On-line  Scanning  Electron 
Microscope Performance Analysis Using NIST Research Material 2091,” Proceedings SPIE 3998, pp. 42-56, 
(2000). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users of this SRM should ensure that the certificate in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished by 
contacting the SRM Program at:  telephone (301) 975-6776; fax (301) 926-4751; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via 
the Internet http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

RM 8091  

 

Page 4 of 4 

