 

ow’ 
Bs  ; 

Staves  oe

National Institute of Standards & Technology 
 

Report of Investigation 

product of DPA]), and ethyl centralite (EC 

 
Reference Material 8107 
 
Additives in Smokeless Powder 
 
This Reference Material (RM) is a smokeless powder of the type used as the propellant in small arms ammunition.  
RM 8107 is intended to support analytical measurements of nitroglycerin (N
G), diphenylamine (DPA), 
N-nitroso-diphenylamine (NnDPA [a nitration 
[N,N’-diethyl-N,N’-diphenylurea]), including qualitative additive identification and quantitative compositional 
measurements.  A unit of RM 8107 consists of one bottle containing 5 g of smokeless powder. 
 
Reference Concentration Values:   The reference values for NG, DPA,  NnDPA and EC content of the powder, 
expressed as mass fraction, are provided  in Table 1.  The reference values we re determined by a single analytical 
technique – solvent extraction and liquid chromatography.  Reference values are noncertified values that are the best 
estimate of the true value; however, the values do not meet  the NIST criteria for certifi cation and are provided with 
associated uncertainties that may not include all sources of uncertainty. 
 
Expiration of Value Assignment:  The reference values of RM 8107 are  valid, within the measurement uncertainty 
specified, for one year from the date of  sale, provided the RM is handled and  stored in accordance with instructions 
given in this report (see “Notice and Warning to Users”).  However, the reference values are nullified if the RM is 
damaged, contaminated, or modified. 
 
Maintenance of RM Value Assignment:  NIST will monitor the reference values for this RM over the period of its 
validity.  If substantive changes occur that affect the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
The coordination of the technical project leading to the investigation of this RM was performed by W.A. MacCrehan 
of the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division and S. Ballou of the NIST Office of Law Enforcement Standards. 
 
The reference values in Table 1 were provided by M. Bedner, contractor of the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division.  
Design of the calibration protocol was done by D.L. Duewer of the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division. 
 
Statistical consultation leading to the reference values 
Engineering Division. 
 
The technical support aspects 
Reference Materials Program by B.S. MacDonald of the NIST Measurement Services Division. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

involved in the issuance of this RM were coordinated through the NIST Standard 

reference values before expiration, NIST will notify the 

was performed by D.D. Leber of the NIST Statistical 

Gaithersburg, MD  20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  20 August 2004 

Willie E. May, Chief 
Analytical Chemistry Division 
 
Robert L. Watters, Jr., Acting Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

RM 8107 

Page 1 of 3 

e, the remaining powder should be stored with a 

ditives NG, DPA, NnDPA, and EC was conducted for 

NOTICE AND WARNING TO USERS 
 
Warning: This material is for laboratory use only; it is  NOT for human consumption.  Refer to MSDS 8107 for the 
chemical hazards associated  with this material.  Smokeless powder is  a highly flammable solid; keep it away from 
sparks and flames.  Avoid storage at elevated temperatures as the material ma y become unstable and may detonate.  
Dispose of unused material properly. 
 
Storage:  Material must be stored at room temperature (23  oC) or below.  Refrigeration may prolong the stability of 
the material and is recommended.  After opening the packaging for use, the bottle should be tightly resealed.  Since  
the smokeless powder composition may be moisture-sensitiv
desiccant, such as in a zip-enclosure ba g containing a silica-drying packet.  If  the powder is stor ed at sub-ambient 
temperatures, be sure to allow the powder to reach room temperature prior to sampling. 
 
Stability:  An investigation of the reference values of ad
stability under sub-ambient, room temper ature, and elevated temperature (35  oC) for a period of approximately one 
year.  The investigation revealed adequate stability  for storage at or below room temperature (23  oC).  Some loss of 
DPA was noted for storage at the elevated temperature. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 
 
Samples may be withdrawn from the bottle at room temp
recommended.  Care should be taken to avoid ignition of the powder during handling (see “Warning”). 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS 
 
Source of Material:   A ball-type, smokeless rifle powder from a single manufacturing lot was obtained from 
St. Marks Powder1 (Crawfordville, FL). 
 
Preparation:   The commercial smokeless powder for this RM was prepared from a single manufacturing lot and 
blended prior to unit bottling. 
 
Method of Analysis Used in Value Assignment:  Approximately 20-milligram samples of the powder were solvent 
extracted with ultrason ic agitation for 75 min.  The extraction solvent was a 25 % (volume fraction) solution of 
2-butanol in methanol and incorporated an internal stan
additives yet inhibits the complete dissolution of the nitrocellulose polymer [1]. 
 
The additives were determined by reversed-phase liquid chromatography with ultraviolet absorbance detection.  The 
four additives and the internal st andard were separated using a Luna C18 analytical column, 250 mm 
× 4.6 mm, 
Phenomenex1 (Torrance, CA), with a 66 % (volume fraction) 
214 nm was used for the additive determination.  Samp
solutions using the internal standard method.  
 
Homogeneity Assessment:   The effect of sample mass (5 mg, 20 mg, and 100 mg) on the reference values was 
determined.  For the three additives NG, DPA, and EC, no
 statistical difference was obtained for the mean value 
with sample mass.  NnDPA did appear to  be lower for the 5 mg samples.  For each of the four additives, the 5 mg 
measurements had greater variances than the other sample weights.  Sample masses of 20 mg were used to produce 
the reference values and uncertainties. 

methanol/water mobile phase.  The absorbance at 
le extracts were determined against in-house calibration 

dard, diethylphthalate.  This solvent recovers the four 

erature.  A sample size of 20 mg or greater is 

                                                 

1Certain equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this certificate to specify adequately the experimental 
 endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and 

procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or
Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 

RM 8107 

Page 2 of 3 

 
Reference Concentration Value Assignment:   The reference concentration values summarized in Table 1 are the 
means of the measurement results obtained by NIST using the method previously described.  The expanded 
uncertainty displayed is the tolerance limit associated with the 16-bottle averages calculated as U = ks.  The standard 
deviation of the 16-bottle averages is given by  s.  The coverage factor,  k, is the tolerance expansion factor of 2.903 
associated with 95 % confidence that 95 % of the population lies within the tolerance limits [2]. 
 

Table 1.  Reference Concentration Values for Additives in Smokeless Powder 
 

 Additive 
 (mg/g) 
 
 Nitroglycerin 
 Diphenylamine 
 
 Ethyl 
 
 

Mass Fraction 

129.1 

± 2.1 

7.80  ± 0.18 
± 0.09 
± 1.3 

36.4 

N-nitrosodiphenylamine 3.05 

Centralite 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Reardon, M.R.; MacCrehan, W.A.;  Developing a Quantitative Extraction  Technique for Determining the 
Organic Additives in Smokeless Handgun Powder; J. Forens. Sci., Vol. 46, No. 4, pp. 802-807 (2001). 

Introduction to Statistical Quality Control,  3rd ed.; John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: New York 

[2] Montgomery, D.C.; 
(1997). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users of this RM should ensure that the report in 
contacting the SRM Program at:  tele phone (301) 975-6776; fax (301) 926-4 751; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via 
the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

their possession is current. This can be accomplished by 

RM 8107 

Page 3 of 3 

