National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Report of Investigation 
 
Reference Material 8323 
 
Yeast Protein Extract 
 
This Reference Material (RM) 8323 is intended to support measurements used to identify proteins in complex protein 
mixtures such as those used in proteomics.  RM 8323 can be used to help assess measurement repeatability within a 
laboratory or comparability between laboratories or among different measurement approaches [1].  RM 8323 can also 
be used in the development and validation of new measurement approaches for identifying proteins in complex protein 
mixtures.  A unit of RM 8323 consists of three vials, each containing 200 µL of frozen yeast protein extract solution.  
The proteins extracted from Saccharomyces cerevisiae have been solubilized in 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate 
in water. 
 
RM 8323 was developed in collaboration with the Clinical Proteomic Technologies for Cancer (CPTC) initiative of 
that 
the National Cancer Institute.  The proteome from S. cerevisiae was used in several CPTC interlaboratory studies that 
aimed to assess the repeatability and reproducibility of proteomic measurement for protein identification [2,3].   
 
Reference  Total  Protein  Concentration:    A  reference  mass  concentration  value  for  total  protein  is  provided  in 
Table 1.  A NIST reference value [4] is a noncertified value that is the best estimate of the true value; however, the 
value does not meet NIST criteria for certification and is provided with associated uncertainties that may reflect only 
measurement  precision  and  may  not  include  all  sources  of  uncertainty.    A  spectrophotometric  method  employing 
bicinchoninic acid (BCA) was utilized for total protein concentration measurements [5].  SRM 927e Bovine Serum 
Albumin (7% Solution) was used to prepare calibration solutions.   
 

Table 1.  Reference Concentration and Uncertainty for Total Protein(a) 
 
0.188 mg/mL  ±  0.038 mg/mL 
(a) The reference concentration value for total protein is the consensus mean of measurements from a single NIST method. The 
uncertainty  in  the  reference  value,  calculated  according  to  the  method  described  in  the  ISO/JCGM  Guide [6],  incorporates 
Horn-Horn-Duncan (HHD) uncertainty for the Type A component.  The measurand is the mass concentration value listed based 
on the method used.  Metrological traceability is to the SI derived unit for mass concentration (expressed as  milligrams per 
milliliter). 

-eport 

validity 

 
Expiration  of  Value  Assignment:    RM 8323  is  valid,  within  the  measurement  uncertainty  specified,  until 
the  instructions  given  in  this  Report  of 
01 April 2023, provided the RM is handled and stored in accordance with the instructions given in this Report of 
Investigation (see “Instructions for Storage and Use”).  The report is nullified if the RM is damaged, contaminated, or 
otherwise modified.  
 
Maintenance of RM:  NIST will monitor this RM over the period of its validity.  If substantive technical changes 
Registration 
occur that affect the value assignment before expiration of this report, NIST will notify the purchaser.  Registration 
(see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Overall  direction  and  coordination  of  technical  measurements  leading  to  value  assignment  were  performed  by 
‘ision.
A. Beasley Green, D.M. Bunk and K.W. Phinney of the NIST Biomolecular Measurement Division. 
 
Analyses were performed by A. Beasley Green and D.M. Bunk. 
 
Statistical consultation and analysis was performed by A. Heckert of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division.  
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Report Issue Date:  20 February 2018 
Report Revision History on Last Page 

Michael Tarlov, Chief 
Biomolecular Measurement Division 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

 

RM 8328 

 

Page 1 of 3 

  

preparation 

pose 

Support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation  of  this  RM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
NOTICE AND WARNING TO USER  
 
Normal 
RM 8323 has been obtained from yeast cells and has the potential to contain toxins that may pose a health risk.  Normal 
caution and care should be exercised during the material’s handling and use. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage:  The yeast protein extract solution is shipped frozen (on dry ice) and, upon receipt, should be stored frozen 
until ready for use.  A freezer temperature of –20 °C is acceptable for storage for up to one week.  If a longer storage 
time is anticipated, the material should be stored at or below –60 °C.  The RM should not be exposed to sunlight or 
ultraviolet radiation.  Storage of thawed material at room or refrigerator temperatures may result in degradation or 
modification of constituent proteins. 
 
Use:  Vials of the RM to be analyzed should be removed from the freezer and allowed to stand at room temperature 
(20 °C to 25 °C) until thawed.  After the material is thawed, it should be used immediately.  The material should be 
mixed briefly with a vortex mixer before aliquots are withdrawn.  
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
Inc.
Material  Acquisition  and  Preparation:    Lysate  from  S. cerevisiae  was  obtained  from  Boston  Biochem  Inc. 
(Cambridge, MA).  The S. cerevisiae, strain BY4741, was grown in a 100 L batch of rich (yeast peptone dextrose) 
medium at 30 °C in a fermentor until an optical density of approximately 0.93 was reached.  The yeast was harvested 
by continuous-flow centrifugation, and the cell pellet was then washed twice with ice-cold water.  The cells were lysed 
by incubation with ice-cold trichloroacetic acid (10 mL/L) in water for 1 h at 4 °C.  The precipitate was collected by 
centrifugation, washed twice with 100 mL/L water in acetone, and pelleted again. 
 
The lyophilized yeast lysate was homogenized at NIST through manual grinding.  The ground yeast lysate powder 
was suspended in 50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate containing 6 mol/L urea in water, pH 7.85.  After gently stirring 
at 5 ºC overnight, the yeast lysate solution was filtered through a 0.22 μm cellulose acetate filter.  To remove urea 
from  the  yeast  lysate  solution,  the  solution  was  thoroughly  dialyzed  (6,000 Da  to  8,000 Da  cutoff)  at  5 °C  using 
50 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate in water as the dialysis buffer. 
 
Homogeneity  Analysis:    The  homogeneity  was  assessed  at  the  time  the  analyses  for  the  reference  value  were 
performed.  A stratified random sampling plan was devised to test for homogeneity across the production lot.  The 
results indicated that there was no apparent trend in the data when plotted against the sequence in which the vials were 
prepared.  
 
 

 

                                                           

(1) Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this report to specify adequately the experimental 
procedure.  Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and 
Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
RM 8328 
 

Page 2 of 3 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Beasley-Green, A.; Bunk, D.M.; Rudnick, P.A.; Kilpatrick, L.; Phinney, K.W.; Proteomics, Vol. 12, pp. 923–931 

(2012). 

[2]  Paulovich, A.G.;  Billheimer, D.;  Ham, A-J.L.;  Vega-Montoto, L.J.;  Rudnick, P.A.;    Tabb, D.L.;  Wang, P.; 
Blackman, R.K.;  Bunk, D.M.;  Cardasis, H.L.;  Clauser, K.R.;  Kinsinger, C.R.;  Schilling, B.;  Tegeler, T.J.; 
Variyath, A.M.; Wang, M.; Whiteaker, J.R.; Zimmerman, L.J.; Fenyo, D.; Carr, S.A.; Fisher, S.J.; Gibson, B.W.; 
Mesri, M.; Neubert, T.A.; Reginier, F.E.; Rodriguez, H.; Spiegelman, C.; Stein, S.E.; Tempst, P.; Liebler, D.C.; 
Mol. Cell. Proteomics, Vol. 9, pp. 242–254 (2009). 

[3]  Tabb, D.L.;  Vega-Montoto, L.;  Rudnick, P.A.;  Variyath, A.M.;  Ham, A-J.L.;  Bunk, D.M.;  Kilpatrick, L.E.; 
Billheimer, D.D.;  Blackman, R.K.;  Cardasis, H.L.;  Carr, S.A.;  Clauser, K.R.;  Jaffe, J.D.;  Kowalski, K.A.; 
Neubert, T.A.; Regnier, F.E.; Schilling, B.; Tegeler, T.J.; Wang, M.; Wang, P.; Whiteaker, J.R.; Zimmerman, L.J.; 
Fisher, S.J.; Gibson, B.W.; Kinsinger, C.R.; Mesri, M.; Rodriguez, H.; Stein, S.E.; Tempst, P.; Paulovich, A.G.; 
Liebler, D.C.; Spiegelman, C.; J. Proteome. Res., Vol. 9, pp. 761–776 (2009). 

[4]  May, W.; Parris, R.; Beck II, C.; Fassett, J.; Greenberg, R.; Guenther, F.; Kramer, G.; Wise, S.; Gills, T.; Colbert, J.; 
Gettings, R.;  MacDonald, B.;  Definitions  of  Terms  and  Modes  Used  at  NIST  for  Value-Assignment  of  Reference 
Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136;  U.S. Government  Printing  Office:  
Washington, DC (2000); available at: https://www.nist.gov/srm/publications.cfm (accessed Feb 2018). 

[5]  Smith, P.K.,  Krohn, R.I.,  Hermanson, G.T.,  Mallia,  A.K.,  Gartner,  F.H.,  Provenzano,  M.D.,  Fujimoto,  E.K., 

Goeke, N. M., Olson, B. J., and Klenk, D. C. Anal. Biochem. Vol. 150, pp. 76-85 (1985).  

Joint  Committee 

[6]  JCGM 100:2008;  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in  Measurement;  (GUM  1995  with  Minor  
at 
Corrections), 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Feb  2018);  see  also 
also 
easurement 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
https://physics.nist.gov/Pubs/contents.html (accessed Feb 2018). 

in  Metrology (JCGM) 

for  Guides 

available 

(2008); 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Report Revision History:  20 February 2018 (Revised total protein value based on re-evaluation of the original analytical results and updated the 
   
entire report to current NIST standards; changed expiration date; editorial changes); 09 July 2010 (Original report date).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  RM  should  ensure  that  the  Report  of  Investigation  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program  at:    telephone  (301)  975-2200,  fax  (301)  948-3730,  e-mail 
srminfo@nist.gov, or via the Internet https://www.nist.gov/srm. 

RM 8328 

 

Page 3 of 3 

