 

 National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Report of Investigation 
 
Reference Material 8375 
 
Microbial Genomic DNA Standards for Sequencing Performance Assessment 
(MG-001, MG-002, MG-003, MG-004) 
 
This  Reference  Material (RM)  is  intended  for  validation,  optimization,  process  evaluation,  and  performance 
assessment  of  microbial  whole  genome  sequencing.    Particular  attention  was  devoted  to  assessing  the  genome 
sequence.  A unit of RM 8375 consists of four vials.  Each vial contains a different microbial genomic DNA sample 
(MG-001 Salmonella Typhimurium LT2, MG-002 Staphylococcus aureus, MG-003 Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and 
MG-004 Clostridium sporogenes).  
 
This material is intended to help assess performance of high-throughput microbial DNA sequencing methods.  This 
genomic  DNA  has  been  extracted  from  cell  cultures.    Because  the  RM  is  extracted  DNA,  it  does  not  assess 
pre-analytical steps such as DNA extraction.  It does, however, challenge sequencing library preparation, sequencing 
machines, base calling algorithms, and the subsequent bioinformatics analyses.  This RM is not intended to assess 
other bioinformatics steps such as strain identification, phylogenetic analysis, or genome annotation. The purity of the 
genomic DNA was assessed to be fit for these purposes. 
 
Information  Values:    Information  values  are  currently  provided  for  the  whole  genome  sequence  to  enable 
performance assessment of variant calling.  An information value is considered to be a value that will be of interest 
and use to the RM user, but insufficient information is available to assess the uncertainty associated with the value.  
We describe and disseminate our best, most confident, estimate of the genome assembly using the data and methods 
available  at  present [1].    Information  values  cannot  be  used  to  establish  metrological  traceability.  The  genome 
sequence files referenced in this Report of Investigation are available at: 
 

https://github.com/usnistgov/NIST_Micro_Genomic_RM_Data/ 

 
Expiration of Value Assignment:  RM 8375 is valid, until 20 July 2026, provided the RM is handled and stored in 
accordance with instructions given in this report (see “Instructions for Storage and Use”).  This report is nullified if 
the RM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance  of  RM:    This  report  will  be  updated  periodically  to  reflect  important  new  releases  as  the  genome 
assemblies are updated.  NIST will monitor this RM over the period of its validity.  If substantive technical changes 
occur that affect the value assignment before the expiration of this report, NIST will notify the purchaser.  Registration 
(see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification 
 
Overall  direction  and  coordination  of  the  analyses  was  performed  by  N. Olson,  J. Zook  and  M. Salit  of  the  NIST 
Material Measurement Laboratory. 
 
Technical measurements were conducted by L. Harris, J. McDaniel, E. Romsos, and D. Catoe of the NIST Biosystems 
and Biomaterials Division.  Analyses were conducted by N. Olson, J. Zook, E. Romsos, J. McDaniel, and D. Samarov. 
 
Statistical consultation for this RM was provided by D. Samarov of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Support aspects involved in the issuance of this RM were coordinated through the NIST Office of Reference Materials. 
 

 

 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Report Issue Date:  08 May 2018 
Report Revision History on Last Page 

RM 8375 

Sheng Lin-Gibson, Acting Chief 
Biosystems and Biomaterials Division 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

 

Page 1 of 4 

ximately  8  weeks 

NOTICE AND WARNINGS TO USERS  
 
RM 8375 is intended for research use.  Since there is no consensus on the infectious status of extracted DNA, handle 
RM 8375 components as Biosafety Level 1 materials capable of transmitting infectious disease, as recommended by 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Office of Safety, Health, and Environment and the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH) [2]. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage:  RM 8375 is stored at –20 °C at NIST but will be shipped with freezer packs and may not arrive frozen.  
Upon receipt, RM 8375 should be kept in the dark at –20 °C for long-term storage, or in the dark at 4 °C for short-term 
storage (if use is likely to be within approximately 8 weeks).   
 
Use:  It is recommended that the genome sequence be used for assessing the accuracy of variant calls and not genome 
assembly,  because  orthogonal  measurement  methods  disagree  about  the  genome  sequence  structure  and  the 
differences could not be resolved.  Due to the complexities associated with the method used to assess base call accuracy 
and the potential for errors in the genome sequence, it is strongly recommended that the user manually inspect aligned 
reads around putative regions with high base call error rates.  Best practices for evaluating variant calls in microbial 
genomes were outlined in reference 3.  
 
These assemblies are based on data from multiple measurement methods; we evaluated the material using a number 
of orthogonal methods to minimize the impact of systematic errors associated with individual platforms.  These data 
are  available  in  the  National  Center  for  Biotechnology  Information (NCBI)  Sequence  Read  Archive (SRA)  as 
Biosamples  SAMN02854572,  SAMN02854573,  SAMN02854574,  and  SAMN02854575  for  MG-001,  MG-002, 
MG-003,  and  MG-004,  respectively [4].    As  sequencing  technologies  and  analysis  methods  improve,  the  genome 
sequence will be updated and available at the Github site (see “Information Values” above).  A new version number 
will indicate updated genome sequences along with a text file describing the changes.  Users who identify errors in 
the reference genome can post their results on the site shown in reference 5, and confirmed errors will be incorporated 
into the next sequence update.   
 
 
SOURCE PREPARATION( 1) 
 
MG-001  is  extracted  genomic  DNA  from  Salmonella  enterica  subspecies  enterica  serovar  Typhimurium  strain  
LT2  isolate  CFSAN000639  (NCBI  Biosample  SAMN02854572).    The  strain  was  selected  based  on  public  health 
relevance  by  the  Food  and  Drug  Administration (FDA)  and  provided  by  the  FDA  Center  for  Food  Safety  and 
Nutrition (CFSAN).  The genomic DNA for MG-001 was prepared by Lofstrand Labs Limited (Gaithersburg, MD) 
from a pure culture of Salmonella enterica LT2 as follows.  The liquid culture received from FDA CFSAN was plated, 
incubated overnight at 37 °C.  Five colonies were suspended in 5 mL Luria Broth, and then inoculated 0.2 mL each 
into 20 x 150 mm plates (equivalent to 2 L liquid).  DNA was isolated by lysing the bacteria in Lysis buffer containing 
NaCl, Tris, EDTA, Lysozyme and sodium dodecyl (lauryl) sulfate (SDS).  Protein was treated with Proteinase K, and 
RNA was treated by RNase A, followed by ammonium acetate precipitation.  DNA was precipitated with isopropanol, 
washed with 70 % alcohol, drained, and then dissolved in TE (Tris 10 mM, EDTA 0.1 mM, pH 8.0).  Proteinase K 
and  RNase A  were  used  to  treat  protein  and  RNA.    Ammonium  acetate  was  used  to  remove  protein.  DNA  was 
recovered by isopropanol precipitation.  DNA was washed with 70 % alcohol, drained, and then dissolved in TE (Tris 
10 mM, EDTA 0.1 mM, pH 8.0). 
 
MG-002  is  extracted  genomic  DNA  from  Staphylococcus  aureus  strain  NRS100  isolate  COL  (NCBI  Biosample 
SAMN02854573).  The strain was selected based on public health relevance and its low percentage of G and C DNA 
bases.  The strain was selected for use by the FDA and isolated from a clinical sample by Children's National Hospital.  
The strain is resistant to the antibiotics amoxicillin and tetracycline.  The genomic DNA for MG-002 was prepared by 
Lofstrand Labs Limited (Gaithersburg, MD) from a pure culture of Staphylococcus aureus strain NRS100 isolate COL 
as follows.  First, a single colony was obtained from the initial culture stab after an overnight incubation at 37 °C on 
a plate.  A single colony was used to inoculate a new plate.  One colony from the new plate was grown in 20 mL LB 
at 37 °C.  The culture was used to inoculate 15 x 150 mm plates which were incubated at 37 °C for 16 h.  DNA was 
isolated by lysing the bacteria in lysis solution containing NaCl, Tris, EDTA and lysostaphin (25 µg/mL) and SDS.  
Proteinase K and RNase A  were used to treat protein and RNA.   Ammonium acetate was used to remove protein. 

                                                           

(1) Certain  commercial  equipment,  instrumentation,  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  report  to  adequately  specify  the 
dorsement  by  NIST,  nor  does  it  imply  that  the
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by NIST, nor does it imply that the 
materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
RM 8375 

Page 2 of 4 

report 

sporogenes 

Clostridium 

DNA was recovered by isopropanol precipitation.  DNA was washed with 70 % alcohol, drained, and then dissolved 
in TE (Tris 10 mM, EDTA 0.1 mM, pH 8.0). 
 
MG-003 is extracted genomic DNA from a clinical Pseudomonas aeruginosa (NCBI Biosample SAMN02854574).  
The strain was selected based on public health relevance and its high percentage of G and C DNA bases.  The strain 
was selected for use by the FDA and isolated from a clinical sample by Children's National Hospital.  The genomic 
>seudomonas 
DNA for MG-003 was prepared by Lofstrand Labs Limited (Gaithersburg, MD) from a pure culture of Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa strain as follows.  A single colony was used to grow a 20 mL overnight culture at 37 °C. A 1 mL aliquot 
was cultured for an additional 6 h, to reach log phase.  Two 1 L cultures were inoculated with 1 mL of the log culture 
and incubated for approximately 17 h at 37 °C.  Centrifugation was used to pellet the two 1 L cultures.  DNA was 
ysozyme  and 
isolated from the pelleted cultures by lysing the bacteria in lysis buffer containing salt, Tris, EDTA, lysozyme and 
SDS.    Protein  was  treated  with  Proteinase  K,  and  RNA  was  treated  by  RNase A,  followed  by  ammonium  acetate 
solved  in  TE 
precipitation. DNA was precipitated with isopropanol, washed with 70 % alcohol, drained, and then dissolved in TE 
(Tris 1 mM, EDTA 0.1 mM, pH 8.0).  
 
is  extracted  genomic  DNA  from  Clostridium  sporogenes  strain  PA 3679  (NCBI  Biosample 
MG-004 
SAMN02854575).  The strain was selected based on public health relevance and its low percentage of G and C DNA 
bases.    The  genomic  DNA  for  MG-004  was  cultured  at  FDA  CFSAN  and  prepared  by  Lofstrand  Labs  Limited 
(Gaithersburg, MD) from a pure culture of C. sporogenes PA 3679 as follows.  C. sporogenes was cultured in 2 L of 
TPGY broth [50 g/L Trypticase (Cat# 211921, BD, Bector Dickinson and Company), 5 g/L Peptone, 20 g/L Yeast 
extract,  and  4 g/L  Dextrose,  pH  adjusted  to  7.1 ± 0.2]  and  Sodium  thioglycollate  solution (STGS)  were  freshly 
prepared and sterilized by autoclaving at 121°C for 15 min.  The STGS was added to the tryptone peptone glucose 
yeast (TPGY) broth after it cooled down to 50 °C at a final concentration of 0.1 %.  The 2 L of TPGY broth  was 
inoculated with 1 mL to 2 mL of C. sporogenes culture.  The media was incubated for 5 d at 35 °C in an anaerobic jar 
system, containing anaerobic gas generator (AnaeroPack, Thermo Scientific, Inc., Waltham, MA).  Cells  from the 
culture  media  were  split  into  four  centrifuge  cups,  pelleted  upon  centrifugation  at  8000 g  for  10 min  at  4 °C  and 
transported to Lofstrand Labs for DNA extraction. DNA was isolated from the four pellets by lysing the bacteria in 
lysis solution containing NaCl, Tris, EDTA and lysostaphin (25 μg/mL) and SDS.  Proteinase K and RNase A were 
used to treat protein and RNA.  Ammonium acetate was used to remove protein.  DNA was recovered by isopropanol 
precipitation. DNA was washed with 70 % alcohol, drained, and then dissolved in TE (Tris 10 mM, EDTA 0.1 mM, 
pH 8.0). 
 
Note:  This RM is isolated DNA rather than live cells because cells are less stable and can  mutate  with each cell 
division, so that the sequence of live cells may not be stable over time.  Extracting DNA from a large batch of cells 
helps ensure that all vials contain essentially the same sequences of DNA. 
 
gel
Stability: 
  Stability  was  assessed  by  measuring  the  size  distribution  of  DNA  with  pulsed  field  gel 
electrophoresis (PFGE).  Using PFGE, no change in the size distribution was detected after storage at 4 °C for eight 
weeks, but the size distribution decreased significantly when stored at 37 °C for eight weeks.  However, because we 
only measure size distribution, we still recommend storing at –20 °C for long periods of time and limiting freeze-thaw 
cycles, particularly if the measurement method requires long, undamaged DNA fragments. 
 
Homogeneity:  NIST sequenced multiple vials in an experiment designed to assess homogeneity of the samples.  No 
significant differences were detected in terms of proportion of variant or copy number, except for a few in regions 
known to be susceptible to systematic errors.  These results, along with the mixing of DNA before aliquoting, provide 
confidence that no large differences in small variants or copy number are likely to exist between different vials. 
 
Purity:  To assess the genomic purity, each component of RM 8375 was analyzed for the presence of genomic DNA 
from  organisms  other  than  the  expected  species  by  performing  taxonomic  classification  of  sequencing  reads.    No 
sample had more than 2 % of the reads from other species [6].  
 
Size, Concentration, and Volume:  Nominal fragment size length and amount of DNA for the RM components are 
useful  for  judging  whether  fragment  sizes  are  appropriate  for  the  application  and  for  sample  preparation.    The 
characterization of these properties in this RM was intended to determine if they are fit for this purpose. 
  
The fragment size distribution of DNA is suitable for contemporary short read sequencing methods that use fragments 
less than 1 kb in length.  Long read sequencing may be limited by the size distribution of the molecules, particularly 
for MG-004, which is substantially smaller than the others.  MG-001, MG-002, and MG-003 have a peak in the size 
distribution  higher than a 15 kb fragment in the calibration material supplied by the instrument  manufacturer, and 
MG-004 has a peak in the size distribution near the 15 kb fragment.  These size distributions were measured using an 
automated capillary electrophoresis system, and biases of this method were not characterized. 

RM 8375 

Page 3 of 4 

The nominal concentration of DNA was measured by fluorescence with confirmatory measurements by droplet digital 
PCR.  The  median  measured  concentrations  by  fluorescence  are  45 ng/μL  for  MG-001,  36 ng/μL  for  MG-002, 
43 ng/μL  for  MG-003,  and  58 ng/μL  for  MG-004.    The  median  volumes,  as  measured  by  pipette,  are  61 μL  for 
MG-001, 61 μL for MG-002, 59 μL for MG-003, and 49 μL for MG-004.  Biases for these measurements were not 
extensively  characterized,  and  some  measurement  methods  appeared  to  have  substantial  GC-related  bias,  though 
methods that appeared to have this bias were not used to assign nominal concentrations.  The approximate GC content 
(fraction of cytosine and guanine bases in the genome) of MG-001 is 52 %, MG-002 is 32 %, MG-003 is 66 %, and 
MG-004 is 28 %.  It is expected that the user will characterize these properties using measurement methods appropriate 
for use in their application.  A small proportion of vials were outside the expected ranges of volume and concentration.  
If  a  customer  receives  vials  with  volume  or  a  concentration  much  lower  than  expected  and  unsuitable  for  the 
customer’s application, please email srminfo@nist.gov to report the issue and receive a replacement. 
 
f  DNA,  and 
Properties of interest for using this material:  Table 1 includes nominal fragment size length, amount of DNA, and 
GC content for each genome, provided solely for information to determine they are fit for purpose, but uncertainty 
and bias of these measurements could not be established. 
 

Table 1.  Properties of Interest for Using This Material 

Genome 

MG-001 
MG-002 
MG-003 
MG-004 

Nominal Size 
Distribution Peak  
(kb) 
> 15 
> 15 
> 15 
~ 15 

Nominal 
Concentration(a) 
(ng/μL) 
45 
36 
43 
58 

Nominal 
Volume(b) 
(μL) 
61 
61 
59 
49 

Nominal  
GC Content 

52 
32 
66 
28 

(a) Nominal concentration is the median value measured by fluorescence, and a small proportion of vials with concentration less 
than 20 ng/μL were found.  Note that some measurement methods have substantial GC-related bias.  If a customer receives vials 
with a concentration less than 20 ng/μL, they will be replaced upon request. 

(b) Nominal volume is the median value measured by pipette, and a small proportion of vials with volume less than 40 μL were 

found.  If a customer receives vials with volume lower than 40 μL, they will be replaced upon request. 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Olson, N.D.; Zook, J.M.; Samarov, D.V.; Jackson, S.A.; Salit, M.L.; PEPR: Pipelines for Evaluating Prokaryotic 

References; Anal. Bioanal. Chem., Vol.  408, pp. 2975−2083 (2016).  

5th  ed.;  HHS  publication  No.  (CDC) 
[2]  CDC/NIH:  Biosafety  in  Microbiological  and  Biomedical  Laboratories,  5th  ed.;  HHS  publication  No.  (CDC) 
21-1112;  Chosewood, L.C.;  Wilson, D.E.;  Eds.;  US  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, D.C.  (2009); 
available at https://www.cdc.gov/biosafety/publications/bmbl5/ (accessed May 2018). 

[3]  Olson, N.D.;  Lund, S.P.;  Colman, R.E.;  Foster, J.T.;  Sahl, J.W.;  Schupp, J.M.;  Keim, P.;  Morrow, J.B.; 
Salit, M.L.; Zook, J.M.; Best Practices for Evaluating Single Nucleotide Variant Calling Methods for Microbial 
Genomics; Front. Gen., Vol. 6, p. 235 (2015). 

[4]  NCBI; SRA; available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra (accessed May 2018). 
[5]  NIST Micro Genomic RM Data wiki available at 
 
[6]  Olson, N.E.;  Zook, J.M.;  Morrow, J.B.;  Lin, N.J.;  Challenging  a  Bioinformatic  Tool’s  Ability  To  Detect 

https://github.com/usnistgov/NIST_Micro_Genomic_RM_Data/wiki (accessed May 2018). 

Microbial Contaminants Using in silico Whole Genome Sequencing Data; PeerJ, 5:3729 (2017). 

 
Report Revision History:  08 May 2018 (Revised staff name; editorial changes); 12 March 2018 (Revised estimates for DNA fragment size 
and amount provided; editorial changes); 08 September 2016 (Original report date). 

 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  RM  should  ensure  that  the  Report  of  Investigation  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting 
(301) 948-3730; 
telephone 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm.  

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

fax 

 

RM 8375 

Page 4 of 4 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

