 

National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Report of Investigation 
 
Reference Material 8391 
 
Human DNA for Whole-Genome Variant Assessment 
 
(Son of Eastern European Ashkenazi Jewish Ancestry) 
(HG-002) 

 
This Reference Material (RM) is intended for validation, optimization, and process evaluation purposes.  It consists 
of a male whole human genome sample of Eastern European Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry from the Personal Genome 
Project (ID huAA53E0), and it can be used to assess performance of variant calling from genome sequencing.  A unit 
of  RM 8391  consists  of  a  vial  containing  human  genomic  DNA  extracted  from  a  single  large  growth  of  human 
lymphoblastoid cell line GM24385 (labeled as HG-002) from the Coriell Institute for Medical Research (Camden, NJ).  
The vial contains approximately 10 µg of genomic DNA, and the DNA is in TE buffer (10 mM TRIS, 1 mM EDTA, 
pH 8.0). 
 
This  material  is  intended  for  assessing  performance  of  human  genome  sequencing  variant  calling  by  obtaining 
estimates of true positives, false positives, and false negatives.  Sequencing applications could include whole genome 
sequencing,  whole exome sequencing, and  more targeted sequencing  such as gene panels.  This genomic DNA is 
intended to be analyzed in the same way as any other sample a lab would process and analyze extracted DNA.  Because 
the  RM  is  extracted  DNA,  it  is  not  useful  for  assessing  pre-analytical  steps  such  as  DNA  extraction,  but  it  does 
challenge sequencing library preparation, sequencing machines, and the bioinformatics steps of mapping, alignment, 
and variant calling.  This RM is not intended to assess subsequent bioinformatics steps such as functional or clinical 
interpretation. 
 
Information Values:  Information values are provided for single nucleotide variations (SNVs), small insertions and 
deletions (indels), and homozygous reference genotypes.  The v3.3.2 benchmark set covers approximately 88 % of 
the GRCh37 assembly and 85 % of the GRCh38 assembly (excluding gaps in the assemblies), using methods described 
in reference 1.  An information value is considered to be a value that will be of interest and use to the RM user, but 
insufficient information is available to assess the uncertainty associated with the value.  We describe and disseminate 
our best, most confident, estimate of the genotypes using the data and methods currently available.  These data and 
genomic characterizations will be maintained over time as new data accrue and measurement and informatics methods 
become  available.    Data  for  HG-002  can  be  found  under  BioSample  SAMN03283347  in  the  National  Center  for 
Biotechnology  Information  (NCBI)  Sequence  Read  Archive.    The  information  values  are  given  as  a  variant  call 
file (vcf) that contains the benchmark SNVs and small indels, as well as a tab-delimited “bed” file that describes the 
benchmark regions in which any additional variants not in the benchmark vcf should be errors.  Information values 
cannot be used to establish metrological traceability.  The files referenced in this report are available at the Genome 
in a Bottle ftp site hosted by the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI).  The Genome in a Bottle ftp 
site for the benchmark vcf and benchmark regions is: 
 

ftp://ftp-trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/giab/ftp/release/AshkenazimTrio/HG002_NA24385_son/latest 

23 

report

 
and 
Expiration of Value Assignment:  RM 8391 is valid, until 23 December 2024, provided the RM is handled and 
stored in accordance with instructions given in this report (see “Instructions for Storage and Use”).  This material and 
associated information values are nullified if the RM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Overall direction and coordination of the analyses was performed by J. Zook and M. Salit of the NIST Biosystems 
and Biomaterials Division. 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Report Issue Date:  01 October 2019 
Report Revision History on Last Page 

Sheng Lin Gibson, Chief 
Biosystems and Biomaterials Division 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

RM 8391 

Page 1 of 3 

 
 

Maintenance of RM:  This report will be updated periodically to reflect important new releases as the benchmark set 
is updated.  NIST will monitor this RM over the period of its validity.  If substantive technical changes occur that 
affect the  value assignment before the expiration of this report, NIST will  notify the purchaser.  Registration (see 
attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Statistical consultation for this RM was provided by D. Samarov of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Technical  measurements  were  conducted  by  L. Harris,  J. McDaniel,  and  D. Catoe  of  the  NIST  Biosystems  and 
Biomaterials Division.  Analyses were conducted by J. Zook, N. Olson, J. Wagner, D. Samarov, and J. McDaniel. 
 
Support aspects involved in the issuance of this RM were coordinated through the NIST Office of Reference Materials. 
 
NOTICE AND WARNINGS TO USERS  
 
RM 8391 is from a human lymphoblastoid cell line and is intended for research use.  Since there is no consensus on 
the infections status of extracted DNA, handle RM 8391 components as Biosafety Level 1 material potentially capable 
of transmitting infectious disease, as recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Office 
of Safety, Health, and Environment and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) [2]. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage:  RM 8391 is stored at –20 °C at NIST but will be shipped with freezer packs and may not arrive frozen.  
Upon receipt, RM 8391 should be kept in the dark at –20 °C for long-term storage, or in the dark at 4 °C for short-term 
storage (if use is imminent).   
 
Use:  It is recommended that after comparing a vcf to the benchmark vcf, only the variants inside the benchmark 
regions be considered as true positives, false positives, and false negatives. In addition, to understand the causes of 
false positives and false negatives, including the potential for errors in the benchmark set, it is strongly recommended 
that the user  manually inspect aligned reads around a subset of putative  false positive and false negatives  using a 
genome browser.  To develop standardized definitions for performance metrics and tools to compare variant calls with 
different representations, the Global Alliance for Genomics and Health Benchmarking Team published best practices 
for benchmarking germline small-variant calls in human genomes, which we strongly recommend following [3]. 
 
As sequencing technologies and analysis methods improve, these benchmark calls and regions will be updated with 
refined versions of the files in a different directory, and this Report of Investigation will be updated periodically to 
reflect important new releases.  The current release contains small variant benchmark sets with respect to the GRCh37 
and GRCh38 reference assemblies from the Genome Reference Consortium.  Datasets from a variety of technologies 
for this genome are described in reference 4.   
 
SOURCE PREPARATION( 1) 
 
This individual is the son in  a  mother-father-son trio released as NIST RM 8392.  The DNA for the son in  NIST 
RM 8392 is from the same growth as this RM.  Coriell Institute For Medical Research grew a large batch of their cell 
line  GM24385  to  produce  approximately  107 mg  of  total  extracted  DNA,  divided  equally  into  10 728  vials.  To 
produce this large quantity of DNA, Coriell started with five aliquots of cells from their stock.  These aliquots were 
pooled, cultured, and split into 50 aliquots.  One of these aliquots was taken for quality control, and ten of the aliquots 
were pooled, split into 21 flasks, grown, and combined.  A small amount of these cells was saved for potential future 
sequencing.  The combined 21 growths  were  mixed and the pool was  split into 5 roller bottles,  which  were again 
grown and combined.  A small amount of these cells was also saved for potential future sequencing.  Finally, this large 
pool was mixed and split into 25 roller bottles, which were grown and combined.  A small amount of these cells was 
also saved for potential future sequencing.  This final pool of cells was split into 3 pools for DNA extraction, and the 
extracted DNA was re-pooled and gently mixed at 4° C for >48 hours before automated aliquoting into vials of 10 ug 
of DNA. 
 
Note:  This RM is isolated DNA rather than live cells because cells are less stable and can  mutate  with each cell 
division, so that the sequence may not be stable over time for live cells.  Extracting DNA from a large batch of cells 
helps ensure that all vials contain essentially the same sequences of DNA.  DNA is currently available from this same 

                                                           

(1) Certain  commercial  equipment,  instrumentation,  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  report  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by NIST, nor does it imply that the 
materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
RM 8391 

Page 2 of 3 

cell line from Coriell, but it may contain small differences in the DNA due to different mutations occurring in different 
batches of the cells. 
 
Stability: 
  Stability  was  assessed  by  measuring  the  size  distribution  of  DNA  with  pulsed  field  gel 
electrophoresis (PFGE).  Using PFGE, no change in the size distribution was detected after storage at 4 °C for eight 
weeks, but the size distribution decreased significantly when stored at 37 °C for 2 weeks or longer.  In addition, for 
similar  human  DNA  materials,  we  have  found  that  no  change  is  detected  after  five  freeze-thaw  cycles,  pipetting 
vigorously, or vortexing.  Because we only measure size distribution, we still recommend storing at –20 °C for long 
periods  of  time  and  limiting  freeze-thaw  cycles,  pipetting,  and  vortexing,  particularly  if  the  measurement  method 
requires long, undamaged DNA fragments. 
 
Homogeneity:  NIST sequenced multiple vials in an experiment designed to assess homogeneity of the samples.  No 
significant differences were detected in terms of proportion of variant or copy number, except for a few in regions 
known to be susceptible to systematic errors.  These results, along with the mixing of DNA before aliquoting, provide 
confidence that no large differences in small variants or copy number are likely to exist between different vials. 
 
Size, Concentration, and Volume:  Nominal fragment size length and amount of DNA are useful for judging whether 
fragment sizes are appropriate for the application and for sample preparation.  The characterization of these properties 
in this RM was intended to determine if they are fit for this purpose. 
  
The fragment size distribution of DNA is suitable for contemporary short read sequencing methods that use fragments 
less than 1 kb in length.  Long and linked read sequencing may be limited by the size distribution of the molecules.  
HG-002  has  a  peak  in  the  size  distribution  longer  than  48.5 kb,  as  referenced  by  Lambda  DNA.    These  size 
distributions were measured using PFGE, and biases of this method were not characterized. 
 
The nominal concentration of DNA was measured by fluorescence. The mean measured concentration for HG-002 
was approximately 300 ng/μl. The mean volume, as measured by pipette, was 37 μl for HG-002.  Biases for these 
measurements were not characterized.  It is expected that the user will characterize these properties using measurement 
methods appropriate for use in their application. 
 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Zook,  J.M.;  McDaniel, J;  Olsen, N.D.;  Wagner, J.;  Parikh, H.;  Heaton, H.;  Irvine, S.A.;  Trigg, L.;  Truty, R.; 
McLean, C.Y.;  De  La  Vega, F.M.;  Xiao, C.;  Sherry, S.;  Salit, M.;  An  Open  Resource  for  Accurately 
Benchmarking  Small  Variant  and  Reference  Calls;  Nat. Biotech., Vol. 37,  pp. 561-566  (2019)  available  at 
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41587-019-0074-6 (accessed Oct 2019). 

ith  ed.;  HHS  publication  No.  (CDC) 
[2]  CDC/NIH:  Biosafety  in  Microbiological  and  Biomedical  Laboratories,  5th  ed.;  HHS  publication  No.  (CDC) 
21-1112;  Chosewood, L.C.;  Wilson, D.E.;  Eds.;  US  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington,  D.C.  (2009); 
ions/bmbl15/ 
available at https://www.cdc.gov/biosafety/publications/bmbl5/ (accessed Oct 2019). 

9 

[3]  Krusche, P.;  Trigg, L.;  Boutros, P.C.;  Mason, C.E.;  De  La  Vega, F.M.;  Moore, B.L.;  Gonzalez-Porta, M.; 
Eberle, M.A.;  Tezak, Z.;  L;babidi, S.;  Truty, R.;  Asimenos, G.;  Funke, B.;  Fleharty, M.;  Chapman, B.A.; 
Salit, M.; Zook, J.M.; Best Practices for Benchmarking Germline Small-variant Calls in Human Genomes; Nat. 
Biotechnol.  Vol. 37, pp. 555-560 (2019). 

[4]  Zook, J.M;  Catoe, D.,  McDaniel, J;  Vang, L;  Spies, N.;  Sidow, A.;  Weng, Z.;  Liu, Y.;  Mason, C.E.; 
Alexander, N.;  Henaff, E.; McIntyre, A.B.R.; Chandramohan, D.; Chen,  F.; Jaeger, E.; Moshrefi, A.; Pham, K.; 
Stedman,  W.;  Liang,  T.;  Saghbini, M.;  Dzakula, Z.;  Hastie, A.;  Cao, H.;  Deikus, G.;  Schadt,  E.;  Sebra, R.; 
Bashir, A.;  Truty, R.M.;  Chang, C.C.;  Gulbahce,  N.;  Zhao, K.;  Ghosh, S.;  Hyland, F.;  Fu, Y.;  Chaisson, M.; 
Xiao, C.;  Trow, J.;  Sherry, S.T.;  Zaranek, A.W.;  Ball,  M.;  Bobe, J.;  Estep, P.;  Church,  G.M.;  Marks, P.; 
Kyriazopoulou-Panagiotopoulou, S.;  Zheng, G.X.Y.;  Schnall-Levin, M.;  Ordonez, H.S.;  Mudivarti, P.A.; 
Giorda, K.;  Sheng, Y.;  Rypdal, K.B.;  Salit, M.;  Extensive  Sequencing  of  Seven  Human  Genomes  to  
Characterize  Benchmark  Reference  Materials;  Sci.  Data 
at 
https://www.nature.com/articles/sdata201625 (accessed Oct 2019). 

available 

160025 

(2016); 

3, 

 

  
Report  Revision  History: 
  01 October 2019  (Updated  title;  updated  released  benchmark  set  information;  editorial  changes); 
    
08 September 2016 (Original certificate date). 

 
 
Users  of  this  RM  should  ensure  that  the  Report  of  Investigation  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting 
(301) 948-3730; 
telephone 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm.  

the  SRM  Program: 

Report  of  Investigation

(301) 975-2200; 

fax 

 

RM 8391 

Page 3 of 3 

