National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Report of Investigation 
Reference Material 8395 

 

 

 
Tissue Engineering Reference Scaffold 

 
This  Reference  Material  (RM)  is  intended  to  provide  a  common  tissue-engineering  scaffold  for  measurement 
comparisons.  A unit consists of one free-form fabricated [1] poly(ε-caprolactone) scaffold approximately 20 mm in 
external diameter, 5 mm in external height, 200 µm in strut diameter, 200 µm in strut spacing, and 47 % porosity.   
 
Reference  Values:    Reference  values  for  strut  diameter,  strut  spacing,  and porosity  are  provided  in Table  1.   An 
image of the scaffold is provided in Figure 1.  Reference values are noncertified values that are the best estimate of 
the true value; however, the values do not meet the NIST criteria for certification [2].  The scaffolds may differ from 
unit to unit.  The uncertainties given provide a gauge of the size of this variation. 
 
Expiration of  Reference Values:    The  reference  values  are  valid  within  the  measurement  uncertainties  specified 
until 31 December 2020, provided that the RM is handled in accordance with the instructions given in this report 
(see “Instructions for Use”).  The reference values are nullified if the RM is damaged, contaminated or otherwise 
modified. 
 
Maintenance  of  Reference  Values:    This  material  is  considered  stable  when  stored  at  room  temperature  and 
protected  from  exposure  to  ultraviolet  radiation  and  moisture.    However,  its  stability  has  not  been  rigorously 
assessed.    NIST  will  monitor  this  RM  over  the  period  of  its  validity.    If  substantive  technical  changes  occur  that 
affect the reference values before expiration, NIST will notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will 
facilitate notification. 
 
The  overall  direction  and  coordination  of  the  analyses  was  performed  by  F.W.  Wang,  M.T.  Cicerone,  and 
C.G. Simon, Jr., of the NIST Polymers Division. 
 
A.L. Darling, L. Shor, and W. Sun fabricated the scaffolds and made optical microscopy measurements at Drexel 
University.  
 
Statistical  consultation  for  the  analysis  of  data  was  provided  by  W.S.  Liggett  of  the  NIST  Statistical  Engineering 
Division. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  RM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Measurement  Services 
Division. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 
 
The scaffold should be stored at room temperature and protected from exposure to ultraviolet radiation and moisture.  
The scaffold should be returned to the container after use and the container should be resealed.  Do not bend the 
scaffolds as they may delaminate due to weak interlayer adhesive strength.   
 
For  measurements  that  entail  an  axial  fluid  flow  though  the  scaffold  (i.e.,  permeability),  two  surface  layers 
immediately under one face of the scaffold may need to be removed to eliminate closed pores, if any.  The layers 
can be shaved off with the use of a disposable microtome blade. 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Report Issue Date:  10 April 2009 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

Eric K. Lin, Chief 
Polymers Division 

RM 8395 

 

Page 1 of 3  

When  a  specimen  is  to  be  cut  from  the  poly(ε-caprolactone)  scaffold,  the  edges  of  the  specimen  may  need  to  be 
glued  with  a  thin  layer  of  an  adhesive,  for  example,  paraffin  wax,  to  prevent  delamination  of  the  scaffold  layers, 
because the scaffolds are weak in interlayer adhesive strength. 
 
PREPARATION1  
 
Scaffolds  were  made  by  a  free-form  fabrication  process  (precision  extrusion  deposition)  [1]  in  a  0°/90°  lay-down 
pattern using a research-grade poly(ε-caprolactone) polymer (number averaged relative  molecular mass = 42 500; 
mass  averaged  relative  molecular  mass  =  65  000;  Sigma,  Inc.,  St.  Louis,  MO).   The scaffolds were  fabricated by 
W. Sun and colleagues at Drexel University.  Two heaters were used during extrusion/deposition.  The feed heater 
was 95 °C and the tip heater was 90 °C.  The extrusion tip diameter was 178 μm, the tip speed was 10 mm/s, and the 
flow rate was 0.017 mL/min.  The targeted strut diameter was 200 μm and the targeted strut spacing was 200 μm.  
All scaffolds have a nominal external diameter of 20 mm and nominal external height of 5 mm.   
 
REFERENCE VALUES 
 
Optical Microscopy to Determine Scaffold Strut Diameter and Strut Spacing:  An optical microscope was used to 
measure the strut spacing and the strut diameter at 5 locations in 10 scaffolds (randomly selected) for each RM.   
 
Gravimetry to Determine Scaffold Porosity:  The porosity of the scaffolds was determined by gravimetric analysis.  
Ten scaffolds of each type were analyzed.  Calipers were used to determine the height and diameter of the scaffolds.  
The  scaffolds  were  weighed  to  determine  mass.    The  density  of  the  poly(ε-caprolactone)  was  1.145  g/mL  as 
determined by the manufacturer.  The following formula was used to determine porosity: 

porosity = {[(πr2 × h) – (m/d)]/ (πr2 × h)} 

where  π  =  3.14,  r  is  scaffold  radius  (cm),  h  is  scaffold  height  (cm),  m  is  scaffold  mass  (g),  and  d  is 
the poly(ε-caprolactone) density (g/cm3). 

Table 1.  Reference Values for Strut Diameter, Strut Spacing, and Porosity of Scaffold 

 
Strut Diameter 
Strut Spacing 
Porosity 

Average 
220 μm 
194 μm 
0.47 

S.D.a 
9 μm 
19 μm 
0.02 

T.I.b 
33 μm 
68 μm 
0.06 

n 
10 
10 
10 

Method 
Optical Microscopy 
Optical Microscopy 
Gravimetry 

 
a S.D. = An estimate of the standard deviation obtained from the 10 units measured [3]. 
b T.I. = 90% tolerance intervals with probability 0.99 [4].  A 90% tolerance interval contains 90% of the units of this 
reference material.  The user should expect that a scaffold received will fall within this interval 90% of the time. 

Figure 1. X-Ray Microcomputed Tomograph of Reference Scaffold RM 8395. 

 

                                                           

1  Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments,  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  report  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental  procedure.    Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  National  Institute  of 
Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the 
purpose. 
 

Page 2 of 3  

 RM 8395 

 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Darling,  A.L.;  Sun,  W.;  3D  Microtomographic  Characterization  of  Precision  Extruded  Poly-ε-caprolactone 

Scaffolds. Journal of Biomedical Materials Research Part B: Appl. Biomater. 70B: 311–317, 2004.  

[2]  May,  W.;  Parris,  R.;  Beck,  C.;  Fassett,  J.;  Greenberg,  R.;  Guenther,  F.;  Kramer,  G.;  Wise  S.;  Definitions  of 
Terms  and  Modes  Used  at  NIST  for  Value-Assignment  of  Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements, 
NIST  Special  Publication  260-136  Standard  Reference  Materials,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  
at 
Washington, 
http://ts.nist.gov/MeasurementServices/ReferenceMaterials/PUBLICATIONS.cfm. 

available 

(2000); 

DC 

[3]  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in  Measurement,  ISBN  92-67-10188-9,  lst  Ed.,  ISO,  Geneva, 
Switzerland  (1993);  see  also  Taylor,  B.N.;  Kuyatt,  C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the 
Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement  Results,  NIST  Technical  Note  1297,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office: 
Washington, DC (1994); available at http://physics.nist.gov/Pubs. 

[4]  NIST/SEMATECH e-Handbook of Statistical Methods (2003), http://www.itl.nist.gov/div898/handbook/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  RM  should  ensure  that  the  Report  of  Investigation  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program  at:    telephone  (301)  975-2200;  fax  (301)  926-4751;  e-mail 
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

RM 8395 

 

Page 3 of 3  

