 

National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Report of Investigation 
 
Reference Material 8398 
 
Human DNA for Whole-Genome Variant Assessment 

(Daughter of Utah/European Ancestry) 
(HG-001) 

 
This Reference Material (RM) is intended for validation, optimization, and process evaluation purposes.  It consists 
of a female whole human genome sample of Utah/European ancestry, and it can be used to assess performance of 
variant  calling  from  genome  sequencing.   A  unit  of  RM 8398  consists of  a vial  containing human  genomic  DNA 
extracted  from  a  single  large  growth  of  human  lymphoblastoid  cell  line  GM12878  (labeled  as  HG-001)  from  the 
Coriell Institute for Medical Research (Camden, NJ).  The vial contains approximately 10 µg of genomic DNA, and 
the DNA is in TE buffer (10 mM TRIS, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0). 
 
This  material  is  intended  for  assessing  performance  of  human  genome  sequencing  variant  calling  by  obtaining 
estimates of true positives, false positives, and false negatives.  Sequencing applications could include whole genome 
sequencing, whole exome sequencing, and more targeted sequencing such as gene panels.  This genomic DNA is 
intended to be analyzed in the same way as any other sample a lab would process and analyze extracted DNA.  Because 
the  RM  is  extracted  DNA,  it  is  not  useful  for  assessing  pre-analytical  steps  such  as  DNA  extraction,  but  it  does 
challenge sequencing library preparation, sequencing machines, and the bioinformatics steps of mapping, alignment, 
and variant calling.  This RM is not intended to assess subsequent bioinformatics steps such as functional or clinical 
interpretation. 
 
Information Values:  Information values are provided for single nucleotide variations (SNVs), small insertions and 
deletions (indels), and homozygous reference genotypes.  The v3.3.2 benchmark set covers approximately 91 % of 
the  GRCh37  assembly  and  85 %  of  the  GRCh38  assembly (excluding  gaps  in  the  assemblies),  using  methods 
described in reference 1.  An information value is considered to be a value that will be of interest and use to the RM 
user, but insufficient information is available to assess the uncertainty associated with the value.  We describe and 
disseminate our best, most confident, estimate of the genotypes using the data and methods currently available.  These 
data and genomic characterizations will be maintained over time as new data accrue and measurement and informatics 
methods become available.  Data for HG-001 can be found under BioSample SAMN03492678 in the National Center 
for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Sequence Read Archive.  The information values are given as a variant call 
file (vcf) that contains the benchmark SNVs and small indels, as well as a tab-delimited “bed” file that describes the 
benchmark regions in which any additional variants not in the benchmark vcf should be errors.  Information values 
cannot be used to establish metrological traceability.  The files referenced in this report are available at the Genome 
in a Bottle ftp site hosted by the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI).  The Genome in a Bottle ftp 
site for the benchmark vcf and benchmark regions is:  
 

ftp://ftp-trace.ncbi.nih.gov/giab/ftp/release/NA12878_HG001/latest 

 
Expiration of Value Assignment:  RM 8398 is valid, until 23 December 2024, provided the RM is handled and 
stored in accordance with instructions given in this report (see “Instructions for Storage and Use”).  This material and 
associated information values are nullified if the RM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Overall direction and coordination of the analyses was performed by J. Zook and M. Salit of the NIST Biosystems 
and Biomaterials Division. 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Report Issue Date:  01 October 2019 
Report Revision History on Last Page 

Sheng Lin Gibson, Chief 
Biosystems and Biomaterials Division 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Last

 

RM 8398 

Page 1 of 3 

 
 

Maintenance of RM:  This report will be updated periodically to reflect important new releases as the benchmark set 
is updated.  NIST will monitor this RM over the period of its validity.  If substantive technical changes occur that 
affect the value assignment before the expiration of this report, NIST will notify the purchaser.  Registration (see 
attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Statistical consultation for this RM was provided by D. Samarov of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Technical  measurements  were  conducted  by  L. Harris,  J. McDaniel,  and  D. Catoe  of  the  NIST  Biosystems  and 
Biomaterials Division.  Analyses were conducted by J. Zook, N. Olson, J. Wagner, D. Samarov, and J. McDaniel. 
 
Support aspects involved in the issuance of this RM were coordinated through the NIST Office of Reference Materials. 
 
NOTICE AND WARNINGS TO USERS  
 
ice  there  is  no  consensus  on
RM 8398 is from a human lymphoblastoid cell line and is intended for research use.  Since there is no consensus on 
the  infections  status  of  extracted  DNA,  handle  RM 8398  components  as  Biosafety  Level 1  materials  capable  of 
transmitting infectious disease, as recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Office of 
Safety, Health, and Environment and the National Institutes of Health (NIH) [2]. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage:  RM 8398 is stored at –20 °C at NIST but will be shipped with freezer packs and may not arrive frozen.  
Upon receipt, RM 8398 should be kept in the dark at –20 °C for long-term storage, or in the dark at 4 °C for short-term 
storage (if use is imminent).   
 
Use:  It is recommended that after comparing a vcf to the benchmark vcf, only the variants inside the benchmark 
regions be considered as true positives, false positives, and false negatives. In addition, to understand the causes of 
false positives and false negatives, including the potential for errors in the benchmark set, it is strongly recommended 
that the user manually inspect aligned reads around a subset of putative false positive and false negatives using a 
genome browser.  To develop standardized definitions for performance metrics and tools to compare variant calls with 
different representations, the Global Alliance for Genomics and Health Benchmarking Team published best practices 
for benchmarking germline small-variant calls in human genomes, which we strongly recommend following [3]. 
 
As sequencing technologies and analysis methods improve, these benchmark calls and regions will be updated with 
refined versions of the files in a different directory, and this Report of Investigation will be updated periodically to 
reflect important new releases.  The current release contains small variant benchmark sets with respect to the GRCh37 
and GRCh38 reference assemblies from the Genome Reference Consortium.  Datasets from a variety of technologies 
for this genome are described in reference 4.   
 
SOURCE PREPARATION(1) 
 
Coriell Institute for Medical Research (Camden, NJ) grew a large growth of their cell line GM12878 in multiple stages, 
produced approximately 83 mg of extracted DNA, and then mixed the DNA and aliquoted it into vials, with the DNA 
divided approximately equally into vials.  Specifically, the pool of cells was split into three separate volumes for DNA 
extraction, and the extracted DNA was re-pooled and gently mixed at 4 °C for greater than 48 h before the material 
was aliquoted automatically into vials of 10 μg of DNA. 
 
Note:  This RM is isolated DNA rather than live cells because cells are less stable and can mutate with each cell 
division, so that the sequence of live cells may not be stable over time.  Extracting DNA from a large batch of cells 
helps ensure that all vials contain essentially the same sequences of DNA.  DNA is currently available from this same 
cell line from Coriell with the number NA12878, but it may contain small differences in the DNA sequence due to 
different mutations occurring in different batches of the cells. 
 
Stability: 
  Stability  was  assessed  by  measuring  the  size  distribution  of  DNA  with  pulsed  field  gel 
electrophoresis (PFGE).  Using PFGE, no change in the size distribution was detected after storage at 4 °C for eight 
weeks, but the size distribution decreased significantly when stored at 37 °C for 8 weeks.  In addition, no change was 
detected after five freeze-thaw cycles, pipetting vigorously, or vortexing.  However, because we only measure size 

                                                           

(1) Certain commercial equipment, instrumentation, or materials are identified in this certificate to adequately specify the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by NIST, nor does it imply that the 
materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
RM 8398 

Page 2 of 3 

distribution, we still recommend storing at –20 °C for long periods of time and limiting freeze-thaw cycles, particularly 
if the measurement method requires long, undamaged DNA fragments. 
 
Homogeneity:  NIST sequenced multiple vials in an experiment designed to assess homogeneity of the samples.  No 
significant differences were detected in terms of proportion of variant or copy number, except for a few in regions 
known to be susceptible to systematic errors.  These results, along with the mixing of DNA before aliquoting, provide 
confidence that no large differences in small variants or copy number are likely to exist between different vials. 
 
Size, Concentration, and Volume:  Nominal fragment size length and amount of DNA are useful for judging whether 
fragment sizes are appropriate for the application and for sample preparation.  The characterization of these properties 
in this RM was intended to determine if they are fit for this purpose. 
  
The fragment size distribution of DNA is suitable for contemporary short read sequencing methods that use fragments 
less than 1 kb in length.  Long and linked read sequencing may be limited by the size distribution of the molecules.  
HG-001  has  a  peak  in  the  size  distribution  longer  than  48.5 kb,  as  referenced  by  Lambda  DNA.    These  size 
distributions were measured using PFGE, and biases of this method were not characterized. 
 
The nominal concentration of DNA was measured by fluorescence.  The mean measured concentration for HG-001 
was approximately 200 ng/μl.  The mean volume, as measured by pipette, was 50 μl for HG-001.  Biases for these 
measurements were not characterized.  It is expected that the user will characterize these properties using measurement 
methods appropriate for use in their application. 
 
Commercial  redistribution:    There  is  no  restriction  on  development  of  commercial  products  resulting  from  the 
knowledge gained from studies using this DNA derived from the Coriell NIGMS Repository. However, RM 8398 
may not itself be used in the manufacture of commercial products due to restrictions in the informed consent. 
 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Zook,  J.M.;  McDaniel, J;  Olsen, N.D.;  Wagner, J.;  Parikh, H.;  Heaton, H.;  Irvine, S.A.;  Trigg, L.;  Truty, R.; 
McLean, C.Y.;  De  La  Vega, F.M.;  Xiao, C.;  Sherry, S.;  Salit, M.;  An  Open  Resource  for  Accurately 
Benchmarking  Small  Variant  and  Reference  Calls;  Nat. Biotech., Vol. 37,  pp. 561-566  (2019)  available  at 
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41587-019-0074-6 (accessed Oct 2019). 

[2]  CDC/NIH:  Biosafety  in  Microbiological  and  Biomedical  Laboratories,  5th  ed.;  HHS  publication  No.  (CDC) 
21-1112;  Chosewood, L.C.;  Wilson, D.E.;  Eds.;  US  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington,  D.C.  (2009); 
available at https://www.cdc.gov/biosafety/publications/bmbl5/ (accessed Oct 2019). 

[3]  Krusche, P.;  Trigg, L.;  Boutros, P.C.;  Mason, C.E.;  De  La  Vega, F.M.;  Moore, B.L.;  Gonzalez-Porta, M.; 
Eberle, M.A.;  Tezak, Z.;  L;babidi, S.;  Truty, R.;  Asimenos, G.;  Funke, B.;  Fleharty, M.;  Chapman, B.A.; 
Salit, M.; Zook, J.M.; Best Practices for Benchmarking Germline Small-variant Calls in Human Genomes; Nat. 
Biotechnol.  Vol. 37, pp. 555-560 (2019). 

[4]  Zook, J.M;  Catoe, D.,  McDaniel, J;  Vang, L;  Spies, N.;  Sidow, A.;  Weng, Z.;  Liu, Y.;  Mason, C.E.; 
Alexander, N.;  Henaff, E.; McIntyre, A.B.R.; Chandramohan, D.; Chen,  F.; Jaeger, E.; Moshrefi, A.; Pham, K.; 
Stedman,  W.;  Liang,  T.;  Saghbini, M.;  Dzakula, Z.;  Hastie, A.;  Cao, H.;  Deikus, G.;  Schadt,  E.;  Sebra, R.; 
Bashir, A.;  Truty, R.M.;  Chang, C.C.;  Gulbahce,  N.;  Zhao, K.;  Ghosh, S.;  Hyland, F.;  Fu, Y.;  Chaisson, M.; 
Xiao, C.;  Trow, J.;  Sherry, S.T.;  Zaranek, A.W.;  Ball,  M.;  Bobe, J.;  Estep, P.;  Church,  G.M.;  Marks, P.; 
Kyriazopoulou-Panagiotopoulou, S.;  Zheng, G.X.Y.;  Schnall-Levin, M.;  Ordonez, H.S.;  Mudivarti, P.A.; 
Giorda, K.;  Sheng, Y.;  Rypdal, K.B.;  Salit, M.;  Extensive  Sequencing  of  Seven  Human  Genomes  to  
Characterize  Benchmark  Reference  Materials;  Sci.  Data 
at 
https://www.nature.com/articles/sdata201625 (accessed Oct 2019). 

available 

160025 

(2016); 

3, 

 
 
  
Report Revision History:  01 October 2019 (Updated title; updated released benchmark set information; editorial changes); 24 November 2015 
   
(editorial changes); 15 April 2015 (Original certificate date). 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  RM  should  ensure  that  the  Report  of  Investigation  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting 
(301) 948-3730; 
telephone 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm.  

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

editorial  changes) 

fax 

 

RM 8398 

Page 3 of 3 

