or 

vatae 

National  Institute  of  Standards  &  Technology 
Report  of  Analysis 

EPA/NIST  Reference  Material  8444 

Cotinine  in  Freeze-Dried  Human  Urine 

This  Reference  Material  (RM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  validating  methods  for  the  determination  of  cotinine 
in  human  uring,  A  unit  of  RM  8444  consists  of  four  vials,  cach  containing  cotinine  in  $  mL  human  urine,  which  has 
been  freeze  dried.  Two  vials  are  “blank”  concentration  levels,  typical  of  nonsmokers  without  exposure  to  cigarctte 
smoke;  one  vial  is  a  “low”  concentration  level  corresponding  (o  nonsmokers  with  passive  exposure  to  side-stream 
smoke;  and  one  vial  ts  a  "high"  Icvel,  typical  of  smokers. 

The  recommended  concentrations  of  cotinine  tn  the  blank,  low,  and  high  level  urine  materials  after  reconstituting 
the  freeze  dried  materials  with  5.00  mL  of  distilled  water  are: 

Blank  leve]  O8  =  0.3  ng/g 

Low  level 

54 

+e 

ng/g 

High  level  488 

*  9 

neve 

The  low  and  high  level  conccatrations  are  based  on  the  total  mass  of  cotinine  added  to  the  urine  and  experimental 
measurements  by  gas  chromatograph-mass  spectrometry  (Sce  Table  1).  The  estimated  total  uncertainties  are  based 
on  judgement  and  represent  method  imprecision,  possible  systematic  errors,  and  allowances  for  possible  degrada- 
lon, 

To  convert  concentrations  from  ng/g  to  agimL,  multiply  by  the  density  of  the  reconstituted  urine,  1.01  g/mL. 

Expiration  of  Recommended  Concentrations:  The  recommended  concentrations  are  valid  within  (he  reported  un- 
certainties  for  one  year  from  the  date  of  shipment.  In  the  cyent  that  the  concentrations  change  before  then,  users 
will  be  notificd  by  NIST.  Please  return  the  attached  segistration  card  to  facilitate  notification. 

Slorage:  RM  8444  should  be  stored  in  a  freezer  at  or  below  0°C  and  should  aot  be  exposed  to  suntight  or  ultraviolet 
racbavion. 

Use:  To  reconstitute  a  sample,  pipet  5.00  mL  distilled  water  into  the  vial,  taking  care  to  wet  all  solid  matcrial. 
Shake  and/or  sonicate  the  reconstituted  sample  until  all  solid  material  has  dissolved  (approximately  one  minute). 
Use  sample  immediately  after  dissolving  (do  not  store  recons(Gituled  sample).  The  “blank”  level  samples  can  be 
uscd  as  a  diluent  for  the  low  and  high  level  concentrations. 

Toxicity:  This  RM  contains  freeze-dried  pooled  human  uring,  and  the  pathogenictly  and/or  toxicity  has  not  been 
determined.  This  material  should  be  treated  as  a  potential  health  hazard  and  appropriate  care  should  be  exercised 
in  handling  and  disposal. 

Preparation  of  this  referonce  material  and  analytical  determinations  for  this  material  were  made  in  the  Organic 
Analytical  Rescarch  Division,  Center  for  Analytical  Chemistry,  by  L.  C.  Sander  and  G.  D.  Byrd. 

The  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  were  performed  by  L.  C.  Sander  and  W.  EE,  May.

  

The  technicaland  support  aspects  involved  inthe  preparation,  measurement,  and  issuance  of  this  Reference  Material 
were  coordinated  through  the  Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials  by  R,  Alvarez. 

Robert  N.  Snelling,  Acting  Director 
Environmental  Monitoring  Systems  Laboratory 
U.S,  Environmental  Protection  Agency 
Las  Vegas,  NV 

Stanley  D.  Rasberry,  Chicf 
Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials 
National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology 
Gaithersburg,  MD 

February  27,  1989 

p 

as 

|  Analysi 

Pooled  human  urine  was  used  in  the  preparation  of  RM  8444,  Separate  urine  collections  were  made  for  the  three 
materials,  Donors  (nonsmokers)  were  adviscd  to  avoid  any  exposure  to  tobacco  smoke  or  caffeine  for  at  least  48h 
prior  to  the  collection, 
The  low  and  high  level  cotinine  solutions  were  prepared  gravimetrically  using  cotinine 
perchlorate.  Appropriate  amounts  of  cotinine  perchlorate  were  weighed  and  dissolved  in  distilled  water  and  the 
solutions  were  transferred  quantitatively  to  the  pooled  urine.  Cotinine  was  not  added  to  the  blank  level  material. 

Five-mL  aliquots  of  the  urine  reference  material  were  pipetted  into  vials  and  then  freeze  dried.  Before  freeze- 
drying,  the  samples  were  frozen  at  80°C.  Freeze  drying  was  considered  complete  when  the  shelf  and  probe  tempera: 
tuces  were  al  ambiont  temperature,  and  the  pressure  was  less  than  13.3  Pa  (100  pm  Hg  pressure).  The  freeze-dried 
samples  were  sealed  in  the  vials  under  a  slight  negative  pressure. 

Because  the  free  base  form  of  cotinine  is  hygroscopic,  cotinine  perchlorate  was  used  as  the  primary  standard  for 
ibis  reference  material. 
Cotinine  perchlorate  was  synthesized  from  cotinine  (Aldrich  Chemical  Co.)  and  70% 
perchloric  acid  using  the  methad  of  Jacob  and  Benowitz  (1). 

Purily  was  determincd  by  differential  scanning  calorimetry  over  the  temperature  interval  210-220  °C.  The  purity 
was  determined  as  99.91  mole  percent  (melting  point  218  °C).  No  evidence  of  organic  impurities  was  observed  by 
LC  or  GC  analyses.  Asample  of  the  praduct  was  submitted  to  Galbraith  Laboratories  (Knoxville,  TN)  for  clemen- 
lal  analyses.  Duplicate  determinations  were  made  for  carbon,  hydrogen,  niteogen,  chlorine,  and  oxygen.  On  the 
basis  of  these  charactcrizations,  product  purity  was  accepted  to  be  greater  than  99  mole  percent,  and  no  correc- 
tions  for  sample  impurity  were  made. 

Deulerated  cotinine  (colnine-d3)  was  obtained  from  Cambridge  Isotope  Laboratories  (Woburn,  MA),  The  isotopic 
purity  determined  by  GC-MS  was  98.7%.  Corrections  were  made  for  the  undeuterated  cotinine  impurity  in  all  cal- 
culations,  Because  deuterated  cotinine  was  obtained  in  the  free  base  form  and  is  hygroscopic,  possible  weight  gain 
from  adsorbed  water  precluded  the  actual  concentration  of  the  internal  standard  solution  from  being  known  ac- 
curately.  The  approximate  concentration  of  this  solution  (12.4  pwig)  was  used  only  in  minar  corrections  in  response 
factors  involving  isotopic  purity  of  the  internal  standard.  The  same  internal  standard  solution  was  used  throughout 
this  study  for  both  unknowns  and  response  factor  solutions., 

GC-MS  Analysis 

A  solution  of  cotining-d3  (approximately  12.4  pe’e)  was  prepared  in  methanol  and  was  ampouled  Cor  later  use.  This 
solution  was  used  as  an  internal  standard  for  both  calibration  standards  (response  Cactor  solutions)  and  For  the  un- 
knowns  (uring  reference  materials).  Four  separate  response  factor  solutions  were  prepared.  Independent  response 
factors  were  determined  for  cach  level,  Separate  response  factors  were  calculated  for  98/101  and  176/179  mass 
frapments,  and  cotinine  concentrations  were  delermined  based  on  both  mass  sets. 

Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments,  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  report  to  specify  adequately  the  ox- 
perimental  procedure.  Such  identification  docs  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  US.  Environ- 
mental  Protection  Agency  or  the  Nattanal  Institute  of  Standards and  Technology,  nor  does  it  imply  that  the  materials 
or  equipment  identified  are  necessarily  the  best  available  for  this  purpose. 

2.

  

Six  vials  from  the  low  and  high  level  materials  were  sclectedby  a  stratified  random  sampling  scheme.  Because  the 
blank  material  bas  a  very  low  cotinine  concentration  special  procedures  were  required  for  an  estimate  of  the  cotinine 
in  these  samples  (described  below).  The  spiked  urine  materials  were  reconstituted  with  5  mL  distilled  water  by 
shaking  and  “sonicating”  for  60  s.  Each  sample  was  spiked  with  50  pL  cotinine-d3  internal  standard  solution,  fol- 
lowed  by  an  addition  of  10  drops  of  10  M  KOH.  The  samples  were  then  extracted  with  5  mL  methylene  chloride. 
The  methylene  chloride  layer  was  removed  with  a  pipet  and  treated  with  1-2  g  sodium  sulfate.  The  methylene 
chloride  was  decanted  into  a  centrifuge  tube  and  evaporated  to  dryness  under  argon.  The  residue  was  dissolved  in 
30  gL  methanol  and  analyzed  by  GC-MS. 

A  DB-210,  250  pm  id.  x  25  m  capillary  columa,  was  used  for  the  GC-MS  analysis  of  the  urine  extracts,  The  follow- 
ing  temperature  program  was  used  in  the  GC  separation:  185  °C  initial  temperature,  linear  ramp  of  5  °C/min,  and 
final  temperature  of  225  °C.  Between  GC  runs,  the  column  was  bricfly  ramped  to  230°C.  A  typical  chromatogram 
from  the  analysis  is  Wustrated  in  Figure  1. 

The  concentration  of  cotiniac  in  the  unspiked  uring  "blank",  was  estimated  by  combining  and  analyzing  ten  vials 
from  the  beginning,  middle,  and  end  of  the  blank  preparation.  The  uncertainty  of  this  dctcrmination  is  large  be- 
cause  of  the  low  signal-to-noise  ratios. 
Similar  measurements  were  performed  for  unspiked  samples  of  the  pooled 
uring  uscd  for  Low  and  high  level  reference  materials. 

Cotinine  levels  were  again  determined  after  160  days,  During  this  period,  the  samples  were  stored  at  ambient 
temperature  for  four  months,  and  at  -20°C  for  onc  month.  The  results  of  these  determinations  are  listed  in  table 
1.  Cotinine  levels  were  found  to  be  slightly  lower  than  previously  determined;  however,  the  values  were  still  within 
the  uacertainty  of  the  measurements.  The  recommended  concentrations  for  cotinine  and  associated  uncertainties 
GC/MS.  The  cotinine 
are  derived  front  the  gravimetric  preparation  of  the  material  and  two  sets  of  measurements  by 
levels  in  SRM  8444  will  be  periodically  monitored.  Users  will  be  notified  of  any  changes  in  cotinine  levels. 

Table  1 

Calculated,  GC-MS,  and  recommended  concentrations,  in  ng/g,  for  cotinine  in  urine  reference  materials. 

Tavel 

Calculated* 

Initial  Concentration 

by  GC-MS 

Concentration  by 
GC-MS  after  160 

Recommended 
Concentrations 

Blank 
Low 

High 

w 
58.47 

489.98 

08  +  03 
56  +2 

41  +6 

days 

--- 
52+  3 

a85  +  12 

08  203 

4 

te 

asf 

*  "The  calculated  concentration  is  based  on  the  weighed  mass  af  cotinine  added  to  the  urine  pool. 

1.  P.  Jacob  and  N.L.  Benowitz.  Determination  of  cotinine  in  human  biologic  fluids.  Recommendations  for  a  quality 
control/quality  assurance  program.  Cotinine  Analytical  Workshop  (EPA),  Research  Triangle  Park,  NC,  November 
10-11,  1986.

Typical  lon  Chromatogram  for  Analysis  of  RM  8444 

  

jon  98  amu 

| 
it 
il 

eee:  UP 

h 
i 
fn  i 

s, 

fon  101  amu 

[ 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i| 

    

adil 
a  NY 

    

ge  ene  tn 

" 

| 

i 

- 
5 

§ 
Tine  (min. 9 

th 

1 

’ 
A 
12 

| 
} 

: 
j 

; 
i 

i 
i

