National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

 

Report of Investigation 
Reference Material 8445 
 
Spray-Dried Whole Egg for Allergen Detection 

 
This Reference Material (RM) is intended primarily for use in evaluating test kits for determination of the presence of 
allergenic egg proteins.  This material provides a common matrix to the allergen research community, who may wish 
to conduct studies using a single broadly available material.  RM 8445 was prepared by representatives from the Food 
Allergy Research and Resource Program (FARRP), Food Products Association (FPA), Health Canada, Institute for 
Reference Materials and Measurements (IRMM), and U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Center for Food 
Safety and Applied Nutrition (CFSAN).  This group is the sole authority for all of the information provided in this 
report, including the reference value and other technical information.  A unit of RM 8445 consists of a single bottle 
containing 5 g of material. 
 
Reference Mass Fraction Value:  A reference mass fraction value for protein is provided in Table 1.  A reference 
value is a noncertified value that is the best estimate of the true value based on available data; however, the value does 
not meet the NIST criteria for certification [1] and is provided with an associated uncertainty that may not include all 
sources  of  uncertainty.    The  reference  value  in  this  material  is  the  mean  of  three  measurements;  the  associated 
uncertainty is the expanded uncertainty at the 95 % level of confidence [2,3].  Values are reported on an “as-received” 
basis in mass fraction units [4]. 
 
Expiration  of  Value  Assignment:    RM 8445  is  valid,  within  the  measurement  uncertainty  specified,  until 
15 June 2024, provided the RM is handled and stored in accordance with the instructions given in this report (see 
“Instructions  for  Storage  and  Use”).    The  report  is  nullified  if  the  RM  is  damaged,  contaminated,  or  otherwise 
ninated,  or  otherwise 
modified. 
 
Maintenance of RM Value Assignment:  The characterizing agencies will monitor representative samples of this 
RM over the period of its value assignment.  If substantive technical changes occur that affect the value assignment 
before the expiration of this report, NIST will notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) 
will facilitate notification. 
 
Nebraska 
The protein in RM 8445 was determined by the Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Nebraska 
(Lincoln, NE).   
 
Technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation  and  issuance  of  this  RM  were  coordinated  by 
K.E. Sharpless, currently in the NIST Special Programs Office. 
 
Statistical analysis was provided by J.H. Yen of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Materials.
Support aspects involved in the issuance of this RM were coordinated through the NIST Office of Reference Materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD  20899 
Report Issue Date:  21 March 2019 
Report Revision History on Last Page. 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos. A Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

Jniversity  of 

M 

  

RM 8445 

Page 1 of 3 

in 

STORAGE  AND 

NOTICE AND WARNING TO USERS 
 
Warning:  For laboratory use only.  Not for human or animal consumption.  This  material is  meant to serve as a 
reference material for comparing analytical methods with the following understanding:  (1) that the use of eggs from 
different  sources  may  have  different  compositions,  and  (2) if  the  material  is  subjected  to  various  forms  of 
preparation/processing, (i.e., baking, boiling, frying) the composition and properties of the material may change. 
 
) 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE(1) 
 
Storage:  This RM, in an unopened container, should be stored at −20 °C in a desiccator or sealed plastic container 
that contains desiccant. 
 
The unopened bottle should be allowed to warm to room temperature (23 °C ± 2 °C) immediately prior to use.  The 
egg powder should not be irradiated or treated in any way that might alter the proteins present.  A homogeneous stock 
solution  containing  an  egg  powder  concentration  of  100 mg/mL  in  phosphate-buffered  saline (PBS)  should  be 
prepared  using  a  Potter-Elvehjem  tissue  grinder.    This  stock  solution  should  be  further  diluted  in  PBS  for  use  in 
evaluation of test kits and treated as a sample according to recommended extraction procedures.  Samples containing 
<1 μg/mL egg powder not subjected to extraction may require the addition of an additive such as 0.1 % Tween−20 or 
bovine serum albumin. 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS 
 
Source  and  Preparation  of Material:    Spray-dried  whole  egg  powder  (Henningsen  Foods,  Omaha, NE)  without 
oroximately
additives or stabilizers was packaged by FDA CFSAN in plastic, screw-cap bottles, each containing approximately 
5 g of material.  
 
Analysis:  Nitrogen was measured using a Leco protein analyzer (Dumas) on two sets of samples, with analysis of 
sets separated by several months.  Results were converted to protein using a conversion factor of 6.25. 
 

n  analyzer 

(He 

1y- 

Table 1.  Reference Mass Fraction Value for Protein in RM 8445(a) 

Mass  Fraction 

RM 

 

 

Total Protein 

Mass Fraction 
(%) 
± 

48 

1 

 

(a) The reference concentration value, expressed as a mass fraction on an as-received basis, is the mean of two sets of analyses for 
nitrogen by the University of Nebraska’s Department of Food Science and Technology.  The uncertainty in the reference value, 
calculated according to the method described in the ISO/JCGM Guides [2,3], is expressed as an expanded uncertainty, U.  The 
expanded uncertainty is calculated as U = kuc, where uc is intended to represent, at the level of one standard deviation, the within- 
and between-set component of uncertainty.  The coverage factor (k) is determined from the Student's t-distribution corresponding 
to the appropriate associated degrees of freedom and approximately 95 % confidence.  The measurand is the total mass fraction 
of total protein as determined by the methods indicted and the value listed is metrologically traceable to the SI unit of mass 
fraction in percent on an as-received basis. 

                                                           

(1) Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this report in order to adequately specify the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
RM 8445 

Page 2 of 3 

REFERENCES 

[2] 

 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment 
of  Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136  U.S.  Government 
Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (2000);  available  at  https://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF 
(accessed Mar 2019). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data - Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement; 
(GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections), Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (JCGM) (2008); available at 
https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf (accessed Mar 2019); see also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results; NIST Technical Note 1297, U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (1994); available at 
https://www.nist.gov/pml/nist-technical-note-1297 (accessed Mar 2019). 
Levenson, M.S.;  Banks, D.L.;  Eberhardt, K.R.;  Gill, L.M.;  Guthrie, W.F.;  Liu, H.-K.;  Vangel, M.G.; 
Yen;, J.H.;  Zhang, N.F.;  An  Approach  to  Combining  Results  From  Multiple  Methods  Motivated  by  the  ISO 
GUM; J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., Vol. 105; p. 571 (2000). 
Thompson, A.;  Taylor, B.N.;  Guide  for  the  Use  of  the  International  System  of  Units (SI);  NIST  Special 
Publication 811;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC 
at 
https://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/sp811/index.cfm (accessed Mar 2019). 

available 

(2008); 

[4] 

[3] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
Report  Revision  History:    21 March 2019 (Change  of  expiration  date;  editorial  changes);  30 December 2013  (Change  of  expiration  date; 
editorial changes); 17 January 2008 (Original report date). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This  can  be 
Users  of  this  RM  should  ensure  that  the  Report  of  Investigation  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
; 
telephone 
- 
(301) 
accomplished  by  contacting 
fax  (301) 948-3730;  e-mail 
telephone  (301) 975-2200; 
's:-//www.nist.gov/srm
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 

the  SRM  Program: 

RM 8445 

Page 3 of 3 

