National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Report of Investigation 

 
Reference Material 8447 
 
Perfluorinated Sulfonic Acids in Methanol 

in 

three 

 
This  Reference  Material (RM)  is  a  solution  of  three  perfluorinated  sulfonic  acids (PFSAs)  in  methanol  intended 
primarily for use in the calibration of chromatographic instrumentation.  A unit of RM 8447 consists of three 2 mL 
ampoules, each containing approximately 1.2 mL of solution. 
 
Reference  Mass Fractions of  PFSAs:  The reference mass fraction values are given in Table 1 for three PFSAs.  
These values are based on results obtained from the gravimetric preparation of the solution and from the analytical 
results determined using liquid chromatography.  Reference values are noncertified values that are the best estimates 
of  the  true  values;  however,  the  values  do  not  meet  the  NIST  criteria  for  certification  and  are  provided  with 
associated uncertainties that may reflect only measurement precision, may not include all sources of uncertainty, or 
may reflect a lack of sufficient statistical agreement among multiple analytical methods [1]. 
 
Expiration  of  Value  Assignments:    The  values  for  RM 8447  are  valid,  within  the  measurement  uncertainty 
d  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  given 
specified, until 31 January 2024, provided the RM is handled and stored in accordance with the instructions given 
in this report (see “Instructions for Use”).  This report is nullified if the RM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise 
modified. 
 
Maintenance of RM:  NIST will monitor this RM over the period of its validity.  If substantive technical changes 
occur  that  affect  the  value  assignment  before  the  expiration  of  this  report,  NIST  will  notify  the  purchaser.  
Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination of the technical measurements leading to the value assignments of this RM was under the direction of  
J.L. Reiner and L.C. Sander of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Consultation  on  the  statistical  design  of  the  experimental  work  and  evaluation  of  the  data  were  provided  by 
J.H. Yen of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Chemical 
Analytical  measurements  were  performed  by  J.M. Keller,  J.L. Reiner,  and  M.M. Schantz  of  the  NIST  Chemical 
Sciences Division.  
 
 
Office  of  Reference
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  RM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

were  performed  by  JM 

cal  Sciences 

 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Report Issue Date:  02 June 2014 

  

RM 8447 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Page 1 of 3 

tains 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 
 
yrted  to  have  toxic 
Handling:    This  material  contains  perfluorinated  compounds,  many  of  which  have  been  reported  to  have  toxic 
and/or carcinogenic properties, and should be handled with care.  Use proper disposal methods. 
 
Storage:  Sealed ampoules, as received, should be stored in the dark at temperatures below 30 °C. 
 
Opening of Ampoule:  Open ampoules carefully to prevent contamination and injury.  The ampoules are pre-scored 
and  should  NOT  be  opened  using  a  file.    Sample  aliquots,  minimum  sample  size  of  50 µL,  for  analysis  should  be 
withdrawn at 20 °C to 25 °C immediately after opening the ampoules and should be processed without delay for the 
reference  values  in  Table 1  to  be  valid  within  the  stated  uncertainties.    Because  of  the  volatility  of  methanol, 
reference values are not applicable to material stored in ampoules that have been opened for more than 5 min, even if 
they are resealed. 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
RM Preparation:  The PFSAs used in the preparation of this RM were obtained from Alfa Aesar (Ward Hill, MA), 
Fluka  (St. Louis,  MO),  and  Sigma  Aldrich  (St. Louis, MO).    The  solution  was  prepared  at  NIST by weighing and 
mixing  the  individual  perfluorinated  compounds  and  methanol.    The  weighed  components  were  added  to  the 
methanol and mixed until completely dissolved and homogenized.  The total mass of this solution was measured, and 
the  mass  fractions  were  calculated  for  the  components.    This  bulk  solution  was  then  chilled  to  approximately  
–5 °C, and 1.2 mL aliquots were dispensed into 2 mL amber glass ampoules that were then flame sealed. 
 
Liquid  Chromatographic  Analysis:    Aliquots  from  ampoules  selected  by  a  stratified  random  sampling  were 
analyzed  by  using  liquid  chromatography  tandem  mass  spectrometry  (LC-MS/MS).    An  internal  standard  solution 
containing  13C- labeled  PFSAs  was  added  to  each  sample  for  quantification  purposes.    Calibration  solutions 
consisting of weighed amounts of the perfluorinated compounds and internal standard compounds in methanol were 
chromatographically analyzed to determine analyte response factors. 
 
Reference  Mass  Fractions  of  the  Perfluorinated  Sulfonic  Acids:    Each  reference  value  is  a  weighted  mean  of 
average  mass  fractions,  with  one  average  from  gravimetric  preparation  and  one  average  from  chromatographic 
measurements [2,3].    The  expanded  uncertainty  is  the  half-width  of  a  symmetric  95 %  parametric  bootstrap 
confidence interval [4], which is consistent with the ISO/JCGM Guide [5,6].  The effective coverage factor, k, is 2.  
Since two methods were used for each compound, the measureand is the average mass fraction for each compound 
listed.  The reference values are metrologically traceable to the SI unit of milligram per kilogram. 
 

of  the  Perfluorinated 
Table 1.  Reference Mass Fractions of the Perfluorinated Sulfonic Acids (PFSAs) in RM 8447 

s)  in  RM

 

PFSA 
 
 
PFBS 
PFHxS 
PFOS 

Compound 

Perfluorobutane sulfonate 
Perfluorohexane sulfonate 
Perfluorooctane sulfonate 

Mass Fractions 
(mg/kg) 

42.3 
55.2 
56.6 

± 
± 
± 

2.3 
1.7 
2.5 

                                                           

(1) Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments,  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  report  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental  procedure.    Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  National  Institute  of 
Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the 
purpose. 
RM 8447 

Page 2 of 3 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of 
Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136  (2000);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF (accessed Jun 2014). 

[2]  Dersimonian, R.;  Laird, N.;  Meta-Analysis  in  Clinical  Trials;  Controlled  Clin.  Trials,  Vol. 7,  pp. 177–188 

(1986). 

(2009). 

[3]  Rukhin, A.L.;  Weighted  Means  Statistics  in  Interlaboratory  Studies;  Metrologia,  Vol. 46(3),  pp. 323–331 

[4]  Efron, B.; Tibshirani, R.J.; An Introduction to the Bootstrap; Chapman & Hall (1993). 
[5]  JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data - Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement; 
(GUM 1995  with  Minor  Corrections),  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology (JCGM)  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Jun 2014);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed Jun 2014). 

[6]  JCGM 101:2008;  Evaluation  of  Measurement  Data – Supplement 1  to  the  “Guide  to  the  Expression  of 
Uncertainty  in  Measurement”  -  Propagation  of  Distributions  using  a  Monte  Carlo  Method;  JCGM (2008); 
available at http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_101_2008_E.pdf (accessed Jun 2014). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  RM  should  ensure  that  the  Report  of  Investigation  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by 
(301) 948-3730; 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

the  SRM  Program: 

ure  that  the  Report 

(301) 975-2200; 

ttp://www.niSt.2cC

contacting 

telephone 

t.gov 

fax 

 

RM 8447 

Page 3 of 3 

