 
,
p
E

 
*

 
t
o

 

National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 916a 

 

 

Bilirubin 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) consists of a sample of unconjugated bilirubin that is certified as a chemical 
of known purity.  It is intended primarily for use in the calibration and standardization of procedures used for the 
determination of bilirubin in clinical samples and for routine evaluations of daily working standards used in these 
procedures.  This material can also be used for quality assurance when assigning values to in-house control materials.  
A unit of SRM 916a consists of one bottle containing 100 mg of crystalline bilirubin.  
 
Due to concerns that the molar absorptivities for bilirubin and its azopigments in the original June 1989 certificate 
were lower than those in a published study [1], an interlaboratory exercise to reassess the molar absorptivities was 
conducted.  The resultant revised values are reported in Table 2 of this certificate; for comparison the original data 
generated in 1988 can be found under Supplemental Information. 
 
Certified Purity and Uncertainty:  The certified chemical purity is based upon the results from several analytical 
techniques used at NIST that are designed to measure impurities and on scientific judgement of these results.  The 
certified chemical purity presented in Table 1 was determined by measuring the mass fractions of impurities, including 
water, and residue from ashing, summing the impurities, and subtracting this sum from 100 %.  A certified value is a 
value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy in that all known or suspected sources of bias have 
been investigated or taken into account.  The certified chemical purity and estimated uncertainty presented in Table 1 
are  based  upon  scientific  judgment  and  evaluation  of  the  numerous  analytical  tests  applied  to  this  SRM  in  the 
certification process.  The uncertainty is meant to approximate two standard deviation limits for the certified value. 
 
Reference  Values  and  Uncertainties:    Reference  concentration  values  for  the  molar  absorptivity  in  caffeine 
ie 
reagent [2]  and  of  the  blue  and  red  azopigment  products,  obtained  by  the  Reference  Method  for  Total  Bilirubin 
(developed by the Committee on Standards of the American Association for Clinical Chemistry [AACC]) [3] were 
derived from results reported by six collaborating laboratories in 1998 and are listed in Appendix A.  The reference 
values for molar absorptivities are presented in Table 2.  The molar absorptivity value of the red azopigment at 
530 nm was obtained by omitting the addition of alkaline tartrate in the Reference Method.  Reference values 
are noncertified values that are the best estimate of the true value; however, the values do not meet the NIST criteria 
for certification and are provided with associated uncertainties that may reflect only measurement precision, may not 
include all sources of uncertainty, or may reflect a lack of sufficient statistical agreement among multiple analytical 
methods. 
 
Expiration  of  Certification:    The  certification  of  SRM 916a  is  valid,  within  the  uncertainty  specified,  until 
01 September 2017,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this 
certificate  (see  “Instructions  for  Use”).    The  certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is  damaged,  contaminated,  or 
otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Analyses  for  the  original  certification  of  purity  and  characterization  of  SRM 916a  in  1988  were  performed  by 
R.G. Christensen, A. Cohen, B. Coxon, M.J. Welch and D.A. Becker of NIST. 
 
Office  of  Reference
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

 

Page 1 of 5 

 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  22 August 2016 
Certificate Revision History on Page 4 

  

SRM 916a 

'ED  FOR  RESEARCH 

Overall direction and coordination of the technical measurements leading to the original certification of purity and 
characterization were provided by A. Cohen and E. White V of NIST.  Coordination of the technical measurements 
leading  to  the  establishment  of  the  original  absorptivity  constants  in  1988  was  performed  by  B.T. Doumas  of  the 
Medical  College  of  Wisconsin,  Department  of  Pathology  (Milwaukee, WI).    Coordination  of  the  technical 
measurements leading to the value assignment of the revised molar absorptivities for this SRM in 1998 were performed 
by B.T. Doumas and B.W. Perry of the Medical College of Wisconsin, Department of Pathology (Milwaukee, WI) and 
M.J. Welch.  
 
Original statistical consultation was provided by R.C. Paule of NIST.  The design and statistical analysis of the molar 
absorptivity measurements made in 1998 were performed by L.M. Gill of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
NOTICE AND WARNING TO USERS 
 
SRM 916a IS INTENDED FOR RESEARCH USE.  
 
Storage:  The SRM is supplied in a vial that has been capped under argon.  The vial is sealed in a foil-lined polyester 
film  bag  also  purged  with  argon  and  shipped  on  dry  ice.    Upon  receipt,  the  storage  temperature  of  SRM 916a  is 
conditional upon the expected time frame for use.  A refrigerator temperature between 2 °C and 8 °C is acceptable for 
storage up to one week.  If a longer storage time is anticipated, the material should be stored at or below –20 °C.  Prior 
to use, the material should be allowed to come to room temperature (between 20 °C and 25 °C) before opening the 
container.  After opening, the material should be kept in the tightly-closed vial, stored in the refrigerator between 2 °C 
and 8 °C, and protected from light. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 
 
The SRM 916a, consisting of unconjugated bilirubin, is virtually insoluble in water near physiological pH.  It is soluble, 
however, in a mixture of dimethyl sulfoxide and sodium carbonate.  A 0.2 g/L standard solution for the preparation of a 
calibration curve may be obtained as follows [3].  Weigh out 20.3 mg (provides correction for purity) of SRM 916a into 
a small plastic dish.  Transfer the bilirubin quantitatively into a 100 mL volumetric flask with the aid of 1 mL of dimethyl 
sulfoxide  and  swirl  the  flask  until  the  crystals  are  uniformly  dispersed.    Add  2.0 mL  of  0.1 mol/L  aqueous  sodium 
carbonate and swirl the mixture until an optically clear, red-orange solution is obtained.  Dilute the solution with a solution 
of bovine serum albumin (BSA, Cohn Fraction V, 40 g/L, previously adjusted to pH 7.4) or with an acceptable serum 
diluent for unconjugated bilirubin [4].  For a detailed description of the preparation and handling of the standard solution 
see reference [3].  Since bilirubin is light sensitive, the flask should be immediately wrapped with aluminum foil.  It is 
further recommended that the solution preparation be carried out with low-intensity incandescent light and absolutely 
away from sunlight.  Standard solutions of lower concentration may be prepared by dilution of appropriate aliquots with 
the serum albumin solution.  It has been reported [5] that deterioration of the standard solution was about 1.5 % 
per month at –20 °C, and about 1 % in six months at –70 °C. 
 
roducts  obtained  by 
The molar absorptivity of SRM 916a in caffeine reagent [2], and of the blue and red azopigment products obtained by 
the  Reference  Method  for  Total  Bilirubin [3]  were  determined  in  a  round-robin  collaborative  study.    The  molar 
absorptivity value of the red azopigment at 530 nm was obtained by omitting the addition of alkaline tartrate in the 
reference method.  The reference values for molar absorptivity are shown in Table 2. 
 
Source, Preparation, and Analysis(1) 
 
Source of Material:  The bilirubin used for this SRM was supplied by Pfanstiehl Laboratories, Inc. (Waukegan, IL).  
It  was  purified  further  by
It was prepared from material that was isolated from hog bile and crystallized as the acid.  It was purified further by 
treatment in chloroform with sodium sulfate as described in reference [6] and recrystallization from chloroform. 

                                                           

(1)Certain  commercial  instruments,  materials,  or  processes  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, nor does it imply that the instruments, materials, or processes identified are necessarily the best available for the 
purpose. 
SRM 916a 

Page 2 of 5 

 

Analyses for Revised Molar Absorptivity Determinations:  In the protocol to reassess the molar absorptivity of 
bilirubin and its azopigments, each of the six participating laboratories made up three solutions at 200 mg/L on three 
different days and made measurements at four wavelengths: 423 nm, 457 nm, 530 nm, and 598 nm.  Each solution 
was measured on three different days and in triplicate each day, i.e. each laboratory made nine measurements for each 
wavelength.  
 
Analyses Related to the Original Characterization of SRM 916a in 1988:  SRM 916a consists of a mixture of three 
isomers of unconjugated bilirubin [7].  The relative amounts of the isomers were determined by two methods. The mole 
fractions of the bilirubin IIIα, IXα, and XIIIα isomers measured by thin-layer chromatography (TLC), using 1 % acetic 
acid in chloroform [7] on silica gel G were 5.3 %, 83.1 %, and 11.5 %, respectively; and measured by high performance 
liquid chromatography (HPLC) on silica using approximately 1 % acetic acid in dichloromethane were 7.5 %, 83.2 %, 
and 9.3 %, respectively.  Recent LC measurements made in 1996 to assess the stability of the isomer concentrations 
found the relative isomer concentrations unchanged.  The absorptivity of the material in chloroform (reagent grade 
containing  0.75 %  ethanol  stabilizer)  at  453 nm  was  (104.8 ± 0.2)  L⋅cm-1⋅g-1  at  20 °C.    A  separately  prepared 
solution,  whose  volume  and  absorbance  were  determined  at  25 °C  gave  (105.0 ± 0.1)  L⋅cm-1⋅g-1.    Both  values  are 
ncorrected for the 1.2 % chloroform, and other impurities in the crystals.  The absorptivity reflects contributions from the 
three isomers of bilirubin present. 
 
Samples of the SRM were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide-d6 and measured by 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR).  
The  amount  of  chloroform  detected  was  1.2 %.    Neither  biliverdine,  an  oxidation  product  of  bilirubin,  nor 
mesobilirubin, the diethyl analogue, were detected by NMR.  The chloroform present is tightly retained in the crystals.  
The loss of weight at 60 °C for 71 h under vacuum was only 0.03 %.  Since the chloroform is so firmly retained, we 
recommend that the material be used as supplied.  Mesobilirubin was not detected by mass spectrometry.  Biliverdine 
was not detected by  HPLC (0.1 % limit of detection) or by visible absorption spectrophotometry (0.01 % limit of 
detection). 
 
Impurities  more  acidic  than  bilirubin  were  determined  quantitatively  by  extracting  samples  with  5 %  sodium 
bicarbonate, washing with chloroform, acidifying, extracting with chloroform, washing with water, and concentrating 
the chloroform extract.  The dry mass of the extracts was 0.20 %.  Examination by thin-layer chromatography and by 
mass spectrometry after silylation indicated that some material similar to or identical to bilirubin had passed through 
the extraction procedure and was in the extract and thus the amount of impurity more acidic than bilirubin is less than 
0.20 %.  Nonacidic impurities  were 0.013 %.  They  were determined by  mixing a solution of 100 mg of bilirubin 
dissolved in chloroform with 0.1 mol/L sodium carbonate.  Bilirubin forms a sodium salt that is water soluble.  This 
solution was extracted with chloroform, the extract washed with water, the chloroform removed by evaporation and 
the mass of the residue determined. 
 
An unidentified impurity was detected by thin-layer chromatography with polyamide as the adsorbent and 3:1 (v/v) 
methanol-aqueous  ammonium  hydroxide  (3.3 %)  as  the  developer [8].    One  hundred  micrograms  of  SRM 916a 
bilirubin dissolved in chloroform  gave a single  yellow-orange  spot at Rf 0.63, but under 365 nm radiation, a pink 
fluorescent spot, which was barely detectable, developed above the bilirubin spot at Rf 0.76.  The quantity of material 
was estimated by comparing the intensity of the spot with spots of known amounts of bilirubin after spraying with a 
reagent consisting of phosphomolybdic-phosphotungstic acid (Folin-Denis reagent) and exposure to ammonia vapor.  
The amount of the unknown material was estimated to be 0.2 %. 
 
 

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fraction Purity and Uncertainty(a) of Bilirubin 
 

3s  Fraction  Purity  and  Uncertainty  ”

 

Purity 

98.3 %  ±  0.3 % 

 
(a) The  certified  chemical  purity  and  estimated  uncertainty  are  based  upon  scientific  judgment  and  evaluation  of  the  numerous 
analytical tests applied to this SRM in the certification process.  The uncertainty is meant to approximate two standard deviation 
limits for the certified value. The measurand is the total mass fraction purity value for bilirubin.  Metrological traceability is the 
SI derived unit for mass fraction (expressed as a percent). 
 

SRM 916a 

 

Page 3 of 5 

Table 2.  Reference Values for Molar Absorptivities for SRM 916a Bilirubin and Its Azopigments at 200 mg/L  
 
 
 

Molar Absorptivity(a,b) 
(L⋅mol-1⋅cm-1) 

S. D.(c)  
(L⋅mol-1⋅cm-1) 

Wavelength 
(nm) 

 
 
 

76 641 
57 079 
50 091 
49 241 

Alkaline Azopigment at 598 
Neutral Azopigment at 530 
Bilirubin in Caffeine Reagent at 432 
Bilirubin in Caffeine Reagent at 457 

 
 
 
 
 
(a) Corrected for purity of bilirubin. 
(b) The reference values are the equally weighted mean of results obtained at six participating laboratories.  The uncertainty in the 
reference values is expressed as an expanded uncertainty, U, at the 95 % level of confidence, and is calculated according to the 
method  described  in  the  ISO/JCGM  Guide [9].    The  expanded  uncertainty  is  calculated  as  U = kuc,  where  uc  is  intended  to 
represent, at the level of one standard deviation, the combined effect of between-lab, within-lab and purity.  The coverage factor, 
k = 2.57, is determined from the Student’s t-distribution corresponding to 5 degrees of freedom and 95 % level of confidence for 
each  wavelength.    The  measurand  is  the  molar  extinction  coefficient  as  determined  by  the  method  indicated.    Metrological 
traceability is to the SI units for volume, amount-of-substance, and length (expressed as L·mol-1·cm). 

601 
729 
849 
444 

631 
765 
891 
466 

± 
± 
± 
± 

(c) One standard deviation of a single measurement. 
 
 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Doumas, B.T.;  Perry, B.W.;  McComb R.B.;  Kessner, K.;  Vader, H.L.;  Vink, K.L.J.;  Koedam, J.C.; 
Paule, R.C.; Molar Absortivities of Bilirubin (NIST SRM 916a) and Its Neutral and Alkaline Azopigments; 
Clin. Chem, Vol. 36, pp. 1698–1701 (1990). 

[2]  Vink, K.L.J.; Schuurman, W.; Vangansewinkel, R.; Use of the Caffeine Reagent in Direct Spectrophotometry of 

Bilirubin; Clin. Chem., Vol. 32, pp. 1389–1393 (1986).  

[3]  Doumas, B.T.;  Kwokcheung, P.P.;  Perry, B.W.; 

Jendrzejczak, B.;  McComb, R.B.;  Schaffer, R.; 
m:  Development 
Hause, L.L.;  Candidate  Reference  Method  for  Determination  of  Total  Bilirubin  in  Serum:  Development 
and Validation; Clin. Chem., Vol. 31, pp. 1779–1789 (1985). 

[4]  Developed Jointly by AAP, CAP, AACC, and NIH.  Recommendation on a Uniform Bilirubin Standard. Clin. 

Chem., Vol. 8, pp. 405–407 (1962). 

[5]  Doumas, B.T.; Perry, B.W.; Sasse, E.A.; Straumfjord, J.V., Jr.; Standardization in Bilirubin Assays: Evaluation 

of Selected Methods and Stability of Bilirubin Solutions; Clin. Chem., Vol. 19, pp. 984–993 (1973). 

[6]  Fog, J.; Bilirubin-Purification-Purity; Scand. J. Clin. Lab. Invest., Vol. 16, pp. 49–54 (1964). 
[7]  McDonagh, A.F.;  Assisi, F.’  Commercial  Bilirubin:  a  Trinity  of  Isomers;  FEBS  Lett.,  Vol. 18,  pp. 315–317 

(1971). 

[8]  Petryka, Z.J.;  Watson, C.J.;  Separation  of  Bile  Pigments  by  Thin-Layer  Chromatography;  J. Chromatogr., 

Vol. 37, pp. 76–82 (1968). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(GUM  1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Aug 2016);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results; NIST Technical Note 1297; U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (1994); available at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/tn1297/index.cfm (accessed Aug 2016). 

[9] 

 
 
 
 
 
 

  
Certificate  Revision  History:    22 August 2016 (Change  of  expiration  date;  editorial  changes);  12 August 2014 (Extension  of  the 
certification  period;  editorial  changes);  30 November 2009  (Updated  storage  instructions  and  extension  of  certification  period); 
30 December 2005 (This technical revision reports an extension of the certification period); 05 December 2001 (This technical revision reports 
the addition of revised reference values for molar absorptivity); 01 June 1989 (Original certificate date).  

 
 
 
 
 
This  can  be 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program:    telephone  (301)  975-2200;  fax  (301)  948-3730;  e-mail 
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

301) 

9 

 

-

SRM 916a 

 

Page 4 of 5 

APPENDIX A 

 
Collaborating Laboratories for Revised Molar Absorptivities (1998).  We gratefully acknowledge the contributions of 
iterlaboratory  exercise. 
the participants in this interlaboratory exercise. 
 
Doumas, B.T.; Perry, B.W.; Dept. of Pathology, Medical College of Wisconsin (Milwaukee, WI, USA). 
Hill, B.; Wisconsin State Laboratory of Hygiene (Madison, WI, USA). 
Külpmann, W.R.; Institut fur Klinische Chemie I, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover (Hannover, Germany). 
Nealon, D.A.; Ortho Clinical Diagnostics, Inc., Johnson and Johnson (Rochester, NY, USA). 
Schlebusch, H.; der Universitats-Frauenklinik (Bonn, Germany). 
Vader, H.L.; Clinical Laboratories, St. Joseph Hospital (Veldhoven, The Netherlands). 
 
Supplemental Information  
 

Molar Absorptivity Values Generated in the Original Round Robin of 1988 
 

Molar Absorptivity(a,b) (L⋅mol-1⋅cm-1) 

 

Wavelength (nm) 
 
Alkaline Azopigment at 598 
Neutral Azopigment at 530 
Bilirubin in Caffeine Reagent at 432 
Bilirubin in Caffeine Reagent at 457 

76 500 
56 700 
50 100 
49 000 

 
(a) Corrected for purity of bilirubin. 
a) 
(b) One standard deviation of the mean of the round-robin results is 300; one standard deviation of a single measurement is 700. 
‘andard  deviation  of  a  single  measurement  is  700.
 

Collaborating Laboratories for Original Analyses (1988) for Molar Absorptivities.  We gratefully acknowledge the 
contributions of the participants in the round robin study.  
 
Doumas, B.T.; Perry, B.W.; Jendrzejczak, B.; Hubbard, L.; Medical College of Wisconsin (Milwaukee, WI, USA). 
McComb, R.B.; Okorodudu, A.O.; Hartford Hospital (Hartfort CT, USA). 
Navazi, W.; Kessner, A.; Beckman Instruments, Inc. (Brea, CA, USA). 
Vander, H.L.; Vink, K.L.J.; St. Joseph Hospital (Eindhoven, The Netherlands). 
Koedam,  H.C.;  Steentjes,  G.M.;  Wikkeling,  R.H.;  Phielix-Strubbe,  C.J.;  National  Institute  of  Public  Health  and 
 

Environmental Protection (Bilthoven, Netherlands). 

 

 

SRM 916a 

 

Page 5 of 5 

