ent  OF  Co, 

“4 fan. 
,  |  ;  National  Institute  of  Standards  &  Cechnalagy 

my 

gs 

Certificate  of  Analusis

 
Standard Reference Material 917c 
 
D-Glucose (Dextrose) 

99.7 %    0.3 % 

Certified Purity of D-Glucose as a Mass Fraction:   

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is certified as a chemical of known purity.  It is intended primarily for use 
in the calibration and standardization of procedures for glucose determinations employed in clinical analysis, and for 
routine critical evaluation of the daily working standards used in these procedures.  A unit of this SRM consists of one 
bottle containing 50 g of crystalline D-glucose. 
 
Certified Purity and Uncertainty:  A NIST Certified Value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in 
its accuracy in that all known or suspected sources of bias  have been  investigated or taken into account [1].   The 
certified chemical purity value of glucose was determined by measuring the mass fractions of impurities, including 
water, summing the impurities, and subtracting this sum from 100.0 %. 
 
 
 
The uncertainty in the certified value is expressed as an expanded uncertainty, U, at the 95 % level of confidence, and 
is  calculated  according  to  the  method  described  in  the  ISO/JCGM  Guides [2,3].    The  expanded  uncertainty  is 
calculated as U = kuc, where uc is intended to represent, at the level of one standard deviation, the uncertainty in the 
measurement  of  the  impurities.    The  coverage  factor,  k = 2,  is  determined  from  the  Student’s  t-distribution 
corresponding to the appropriate degrees of freedom and approximately 95 % confidence. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 917c is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until 01 March 2021, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with instructions given in this certificate 
(see  “Instructions  for  Use”).    The  certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is  damaged,  contaminated,  or  otherwise 
modified.  
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Metrological Traceability:  The measurand is the total mass fraction for D-Glucose.  Metrological traceability is the 
SI derived unit for mass fraction (expressed as a percent). 
 
Overall  direction  and  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  certification  was  performed  by 
K.W. Phinney of the NIST Biomolecular Measurement Division. 
 
Analytical  measurements  were  performed  by  D.W. Bearden,  B.J. Porter,  M.M. Schantz,  L.T. Sniegoski,  and 
M.J. Welch  of  the  NIST  Chemical  Sciences  Division,  and  B.E. Lang  of  the  NIST  Biosystems  and  Biomaterials 
Division. 
 
Statistical analysis of data was provided by N.F. Zhang of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division.  
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  10 February 2016 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page

Steven J. Choquette, Acting Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

SRM 917c  

 

Page 1 of 2 

NOTICE AND WARNING TO USERS 
 
SRM 917c IS INTENDED FOR RESEARCH USE. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 
 
Storage:  The SRM should be stored in its original bottle at temperatures between 20 °C and 25 °C.  The bottle must 
be tightly re-capped after use and protected from heat,  excessive  moisture, and direct sunlight.   Refrigeration in a 
desiccator is recommended for prolonged storage.  However, the bottle and contents should be allowed to warm to 
room temperature before opening. 
 
Drying Instructions:  For laboratory environments where the relative humidity is below 75 %, there are no special 
drying  requirements  before  use.    For  laboratory  environments  where  the  relative  humidity  is  75 %  or  above,  the 
sample must be dried under vacuum at 60 °C for 24 hours before use.  The surface of the material absorbs a significant 
amount of moisture when exposed to a relative humidity of approximately 75 %.  Because the certified purity is based 
on a specific moisture content, any added moisture will lower the purity.  NIST experience indicates that moisture 
gain is not a significant problem at a relative humidity of approximately 50 %. 
 
Instructions for Use as a Standard in Clinical Applications:  A 1 % (mass concentration) standard solution of glucose 
may  be  prepared  by  transferring  1.003 g  (mass  in  air)  of  SRM 917c  into  a  100 mL  volumetric  flask,  filling  to 
approximately  100 mL  with  a  0.2 %  (mass  concentration)  benzoic  acid  solution  (a  preservative),  and  swirling  to 
dissolve.  Adjust to volume with the 0.2 % benzoic acid solution.  The benzoic acid should be ACS Reagent grade.  
The final glucose mass concentration of this solution is 10 mg/mL. 
 
SOURCE AND ANALYSIS 
 
Source:  The D-glucose used for this SRM was obtained from a commercial supplier. 
 
NIST Analyses for Purity:  The purity of SRM 917c was assessed by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and gas 
chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS). 
 
Additional Analyses:  Moisture was determined by the Karl Fischer method.  Karl Fischer titration yielded a moisture 
content of 0.66 mg/g.  Results of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) analysis were consistent with a purity >99 % 
and indicated that there was no significant contribution from other saccharides. 
 
Homogeneity  Assessment:    The  homogeneity  of  SRM 917c  was  assessed  at  NIST  by  differential  scanning 
calorimetry (DSC).  An analysis of variance did not show inhomogeneity for the test portions analyzed.  
 
 

REFERENCES 

[2] 

 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment 
of  Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136,  U.S. Government 
Printing  Office:  Gaithersburg, MD  (2000);  available  at  http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/sp811/index.cfm 
(accessed Feb 2016). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(GUM 1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Feb 2016);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results; NIST Technical Note 1297; U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (1994); available at 
http://www.nist.gov/physlab/pubs/tn1297/index.cfm (accessed Feb 2016). 
Levenson, M.S.; Banks, D.L.; Eberhardt, K.R.; Gill, L.M.; Guthrie, W.F.; Liu, H.K.; Vangel, M.G..; Yen, J.H.; 
Zhang, N.F.; An Approach to Combining Results From Multiple Methods Motivated by the ISO GUM; J. Res. 
Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., Vol. 105, pp. 571–579 (2000). 

[3] 

 
 
Certificate  Revision  History:    10 February 2016 (Editorial  changes);  21 November 2013 (Extension  of  certification  period; 
editorial changes); 30 June 2009 (Original certificate date). 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
(301) 948-3730; 
telephone 
accomplished  by 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

contacting 

fax 

SRM 917c  

 

Page 2 of 2 

