National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 918b 

 

 
Potassium Chloride 
 
(Clinical Standard) 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended for use as an analytical standard of known purity.  It is intended 
primarily for use in the calibration and standardization of procedures for potassium (K) and chloride (Cl) determinations 
employed in clinical analysis and for routine critical evaluation of the daily working standards used in these procedures.  
This lot of potassium chloride (KCl) was prepared to ensure a material of high purity and homogeneity and has been 
assayed after heating at 110 °C to 120 °C.  A unit of SRM 918b consists of a single glass bottle containing 30 g of the 
material. 
 
Certified Values:  The certified values for this SRM are listed in Table 1.  The certified values for this SRM are 
expressed as mass fractions, w, of KCl, K, and Cl.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest 
confidence in its accuracy in that all known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or accounted for by 
NIST [1].   
 

Table 1.  Certified Values(a)  for SRM 918b Potassium Chloride 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Quantity 
 

 
wKCl  
wK  
wCl  

 

Value 
(%) 

±    0.014  

99.927 
52.4121  ±    0.0086  
47.5284  ±   0.0049 

(a)  Each result is expressed as the certified value ± the expanded uncertainty, U, calculated as U = kuc, where uc is the combined standard 
uncertainty calculated according to the ISO and NIST Guides [2].  The value of uc is intended to represent, at the level of one standard 
deviation, the combined effect of inherent sources of uncertainty of the assay techniques and applicable corrections for interfering 
trace elements.  The value of k is 1.96, which is the coverage factor corresponding to approximately 95 % confidence based on > 1000 
overall effective degrees of freedom. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of this SRM is valid until 01 August 2016, within the measurement 
uncertainties  specified,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this 
certificate (see “Instructions for Use”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or modified. 
 
The coordination of the technical measurements leading to the certification of SRM 918b was provided by K.W. Pratt of 
the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division. 
 
The coulometric and gravimetric analyses were performed by K.W. Pratt and T.W. Vetter, respectively, of the NIST 
Analytical Chemistry Division.  Trace bromine (Br) determination by X-ray fluorescence was performed in the NIST 
Analytical Chemistry Division by J.R. Sieber.  Additional trace element analyses by glow-discharge mass spectrometry 
were performed by a commercial laboratory. 
 
Statistical consultation was provided by W.F. Guthrie of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
The support aspects involved in the preparation of this SRM were coordinated through the NIST Measurement Services 
Division. 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  05 February 2007 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

Stephen A. Wise, Chief 
Analytical Chemistry Division 

SRM 918b 

 Page 1 of 3 

Reference Values:  A reference value for the mass fraction of bromine is listed in Table 2.   The expanded uncertainty is 
calculated using k = 2.  A reference value is a best estimate of the true value provided by NIST where all known or 
suspected sources of bias have not been fully investigated by NIST [1]. 
 

Table 2.  Reference Value for SRM 918b 

Element 

 
Br 

Mass Fraction  
(µg/g) 
 
130 

Expanded Uncertainty  
(µg/g) 
 
45 

Information  Values:    Table  3  lists  information  values  for  the  mass  fractions  of  trace  elements  in  SRM  918b.  
Information values are non-certified values that may be of interest and use to the SRM user, but insufficient information 
is available to provide an uncertainty associated with the value [1].  No other elements were detected at a mass fraction 
greater than 1 µg/g. 

 

 

 

 
Table 3.  Information Values for SRM 918b 

Element 

 
Na 
Rb 
Si 

Mass Fraction 
(µg/g) 
 
 
35 

2.6 
1.8 

 
Maintenance  of  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  representative  samples  from  this  SRM  lot  over  the  period  of 
its certification.  If  substantive  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  certification, 
NIST will notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
NOTICE AND WARNINGS TO USERS 
 
This SRM is intended for “in vitro” diagnostic use only. 
 
Stability  and  Storage:    This  SRM  should  be  stored  in  its  original  bottle  at  room  temperature.    It  must  be  tightly 
re-capped after use and protected from moisture. 
 
Homogeneity:  This SRM is homogeneous within the uncertainty limits for the nominal sample mass, 250 mg, used for 
the coulometric assays.  Samples less than 250 mg are not recommended in order to avoid possible heterogeneity with 
smaller sample sizes. 
 
Possible Interfering Species:  It is the responsibility of the user to evaluate which species may interfere with the 
application  of  this  SRM  and  to  apply  any  necessary  corrections  that  affect  the  given  application.    The  following 
information and the values in Tables 2 and 3 may be useful in this evaluation. 
 
The certified value for wKCl is obtained from a weighted combination of the results of independent coulometric analyses, 
corrected for the potassium bromide (KBr), rubidium chloride (RbCl), and sodium chloride (NaCl) impurities; and 
gravimetric analyses, corrected for the KBr impurity. 
 
The certified value for wK is obtained from an equally-weighted combination of wK obtained directly from the gravimetric 
analyses and the indirect wK, which is calculated from the coulometric wKCl and the additional K in the KBr impurity. 
 
The certified value for wCl is obtained from the coulometric analyses, corrected for interfering bromide. 
 
The  corrections  for  bromide,  sodium,  and  rubidium  were  obtained  from  the  trace  element  determinations  and  the 
appropriate gravimetric factors [3].  A portion of the K is present in SRM 918b as KBr, and a portion of the chloride is 
present as NaCl and RbCl.  Therefore, the sum of the certified values for wK and wCl does not equal the certified value for 
wKCl. 

SRM 918b 

 Page 2 of 3 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 
 
Drying  Instructions:    Dry  the  material  at  110 °C  to  120 °C  for  4  h.    After  the  SRM  has  been  dried,  store  it  in  a 
desiccator over anhydrous magnesium perchlorate. 
 
Source of Material:  The KCl used for this SRM was obtained from a commercial supplier.  The material was examined 
for compliance with the specification for reagent grade KCl as specified by the American Chemical Society [4].  The 
material was found to meet or exceed the minimum requirements in every respect. 
 
Assay Techniques:  The coulometric assay value was obtained by automated titration [5] with coulometrically generated 
Ag+  using  potentiometric  detection  of  the  endpoint.    The  gravimetric  assay  value  was  obtained  by  ion-exchange 
separation of the K fraction and conversion to potassium sulfate (K2SO4), including corrections for instrumentally-
determined K not collected with the K fraction and for trace contaminants in the K2SO4 (procedure based on reference 6). 
 
 
 
 
[1]  May, W.; Parris, R.; Beck, C.; Fassett, J.; Greenberg, R.; Guenther, F.; Kramer, G.; Wise, S.; Gills, T.; Colbert, J.; 
Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of Reference 
Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  
Washington, DC (2000); available at http://www.cstl.nist.gov/nist839/special_pubs/SP260136.pdf. 
ISO;  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in  Measurement;  ISBN  92-67-10188-9,  lst  ed.;  International 
Organization for Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland (1993); see also Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for 
Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement  Results;  NIST  Technical  Note  1297,  U.S. 
Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (1994); available at http://physics.nist.gov/Pubs. 
IUPAC Commission of Atomic Weights and Isotopic Abundances; Pure & Appl. Chem., Vol. 75 (8), pp. 1107–1122 
(2003). 

REFERENCES 

[2] 

[3] 

[4]  Reagent Chemicals; 9th ed., American Chemical Society:  Washington, DC (1999). 
[5]  Pratt, K.W.; Automated, High-Precision Coulometric Titrimetry Part II. Strong and Weak Acids and Bases; Anal. 

Chim. Acta, Vol. 289 (2), 135–142 (1994). 

[6]  Moody, J.R.; Vetter, T.W.; Development of the Ion Exchange-Gravimetric Method for Sodium in Serum as a 

Definitive Method; J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., Vol. 101, pp. 155–164 (1996); available at 
http://nvl.nist.gov/pub/nistpubs/jres/101/2/j2mood.pdf. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  certificate  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be  accomplished  by 
contacting the SRM Program at:  telephone (301) 975-6776; fax (301) 926-4751; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the 
Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm

SRM 918b 

 Page 3 of 3 

