ent  OF  Co, 

“4 

a 
z  x2]  ;  National  Institute  of  Standards  &  Cerchmolagy 

ee 

my 

gs 

Certificate  of  Analusis

 
Standard Reference Material 919b 
 
Sodium Chloride 
 
This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  for  the  production  of  saline  solutions  of  accurately  known 
concentration and the calibration of instrumentation and standardization of procedures used in the determination of 
sodium and chloride ions.  A unit of SRM 919b consists of a single glass bottle containing 30 g of the material. 
 
Certified  Values:    Table 1  lists  the  certified  values  for  this  SRM,  expressed  as  mass  fractions,  w,  of  sodium 
chloride (NaCl), chloride (Cl−), and sodium (Na+).  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest 
confidence  in  its  accuracy  in  that  all  known  or  suspected  sources  of  bias  have  been  investigated  or  taken  into 
account [1]. 
 

Table 1.  Certified Values(a) for SRM 919b Sodium Chloride 

 

 

 
wNaCl  
wCl−  
wNa+  

 
99.835 % 
 
60.564 % 
39.2747 %   

 
 
 
 
(a) Each result is expressed as the certified value  the expanded uncertainty, U, calculated as U = kuc, where uc is the combined 
standard uncertainty calculated according to the ISO/JCGM and NIST Guides [2].  The value of uc is intended to represent, at 
the level of one standard deviation, the combined effects of inherent sources of uncertainty of the assay techniques and applicable 
corrections for interfering trace elements.  The value of the coverage factor, k, is 2, which corresponds to a level of confidence 
of approximately 95 %.  The certified values for the mass fractions of Na, Cl, and NaCl are metrologically traceable to the SI 
units for mass, current, and time in the coulometric assay; to the SI unit for mass in the gravimetric assay; and to the derived SI 
unit kilogram per kilogram for mass fraction (expressed as a percent) for the corrections for trace elements. 

0.020 % 
0.014 % 
0.0075 % 

 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 919b is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until  01 March 2022,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this 
certificate (see “Instructions for Storage and Use”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, 
or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance  of  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  representative  samples  from  this  SRM  lot  over  the  period  of 
its certification.  If  substantive  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  certification, 
NIST will notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination of the technical measurements leading to the certification of SRM 919b was provided by K.W. Pratt and 
T.W. Vetter of the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division. 
 
Coulometric and gravimetric analyses were performed at NIST by K.W. Pratt and T.W. Vetter, respectively.  Trace 
element analyses by spark-source mass spectrometry were performed by a commercial laboratory. 
 
Statistical consultation was provided by W.F. Guthrie of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  09 February 2016 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Steven J. Choquette, Acting Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

SRM 919b  

Page 1 of 3 

Information Values:  Table 2 lists information values for selected impurities in SRM 919b.  No other elements were 
detected at a mass fraction greater than 1 µg/g.  Information values are non-certified values that may be of interest and 
use to the SRM user, but insufficient information is available to provide an uncertainty associated with the value [1].  
Information values cannot be used to establish metrological traceability. 
 

Table 2.  Information Values for SRM 919b 

 

Element 

 
Br 
S 
K 
Si 
Ca 
P 
Al 
I 
F 
Ni 
Li 
Mg 
Rb 
Ba 
Cs 

Mass Fraction  
(µg/g) 
 
 
15 
10 
7 
5 
1 
0.5 
0.4 

< 25 
< 5 
< 2 
< 1 
< 1 
< 1 
< 1 
< 0.5 

 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Stability and Storage:  This SRM  should be stored in its original bottle at room temperature.  It  must be tightly 
re-capped  after  use  and  protected  from  moisture  and  light.    At  room  temperature,  sodium  chloride  is  hygroscopic 
above  60 %  relative  humidity.    It  is  recommended  that  weighing  and  other  manipulations  not  be  made  when  the 
relative humidity exceeds 60 %. 
 
Homogeneity:  This SRM is homogeneous within the uncertainty limits for the nominal sample mass, 170 mg, used 
for the coulometric assays.  Samples less than 170 mg are not recommended, in order to avoid possible heterogeneity 
with smaller sample sizes. 
 
Possible Interfering Species:  It is the responsibility of the user to evaluate  which species may interfere with the 
application  of  this  SRM  and  to  apply  any  necessary  corrections  that  affect  the  given  application.    The  following 
information and the values in Table 2 may be useful in this evaluation. 
 
Corrections  for  trace  elements  were  obtained  from  the  spark-source  mass  spectrometric  determinations  and  the 
appropriate  gravimetric  factors.    A  portion  of  the  Na+  is  assumed  to  be  present  in  SRM 919b  as  sodium 
sulfate (Na2SO4),  sodium  bromide  (NaBr),  sodium  iodide  (NaI),  disodium  hydrogen  phosphate (Na2HPO4),  and 
sodium  fluoride (NaF);  and  a  portion  of  the  Cl−  is  assumed  to  be  present  as  potassium  chloride  (KCl),  lithium 
chloride (LiCl),  calcium  chloride (CaCl2),  nickel  chloride (NiCl2),  aluminum  chloride (AlCl3),  magnesium 
chloride (MgCl2), barium chloride (BaCl2), rubidium chloride (RbCl), and cesium chloride (CsCl).  Silicon is assumed 
to be present as silicon dioxide (SiO2).  Hence, the sum of the certified values for wNa+ and wCl− does not equal the 
certified value for wNaCl. 
 
The  certified  value  for  wNaCl  is  obtained  from  an  equally  weighted  combination  of  the  results  of  the  gravimetric 
determination  of  NaCl,  with  appropriate  corrections  for  trace  elements;  and  the  results  of  the  coulometric 
determination of NaCl, with appropriate corrections for trace elements. 
 
The  certified  value  for  wCl−  is  obtained  from  an  equally  weighted  combination  of  the  results  of  the  coulometric 
determination of Cl−, with corrections for interfering bromide and iodide; and the results of the indirect determination 
of Cl obtained from the gravimetric determination of Na+, with appropriate corrections for trace elements. 

SRM 919b  

Page 2 of 3 

The  certified  value  for  wNa+  is  obtained  from  an  equally  weighted  combination  of  the  results  of  the  gravimetric 
determination of Na+, with appropriate corrections for trace elements; and the results of the indirect determination of 
Na+ obtained from the coulometric determination of Cl−, with appropriate corrections for trace elements. 
 
Coulometric measurements of SRM 919b ignited for 3 h at 600 °C and measurements of change in mass on ignition 
each indicate the presence of (0.16    0.02 ) % inert volatile material, presumably occluded water, which is volatilized 
on ignition.  This value is a reference value [1], which is a best estimate of the true value, where all known or suspected 
sources of bias have not been fully investigated by NIST. 
 
Drying Instructions:  Dry for 3 h at 110 C.  After the SRM has been dried, store it in a desiccator over anhydrous 
magnesium perchlorate and gently crush any lumps present before using. 
 
Source  of Material:   The  NaCl  used  for  this  SRM  was  obtained  from  a  commercial  supplier.   The  material  was 
examined  for  compliance  with  the  specification  for  reagent  grade  NaCl  as  specified  by  the  American  
Chemical Society [3].  The material was found to meet or exceed the minimum requirements in every respect. 
 
Assay  Techniques:    The  coulometric  assay  value  was  obtained  by  automated  titration [4]  with  coulometrically 
generated  Ag+  using  potentiometric  detection  of  the  endpoint.    The  gravimetric  assay  value  was  obtained  by 
conversion of the Na present to Na2SO4, including corrections for trace impurities in the SRM (procedure based on 
reference 5). 
 
NOTICE TO USERS 
 
This SRM is for research use only. 
 
NIST encourages the use of its SRMs to establish metrological traceability for the user’s measurement results, and 
NIST strives to maintain the SRM inventory supply.  However, NIST cannot guarantee the continued or continuous 
supply of any specific SRM. Accordingly, NIST encourages the use of SRMs as primary benchmarks for the quality 
and accuracy of the user’s in-house (working) standards.  As such, SRMs should be used to validate or otherwise 
assign values to the more routinely used standards in a laboratory.  When the metrologically traceable values of such 
standards are assigned  using  this SRM  for calibration, the  uncertainties assigned to  those values  must include the 
uncertainty  of  the  certified  value  of  this  SRM,  appropriately  combined  with  the  uncertainties  of  the  calibration 
measurements  for  the  in-house  standard.    Comparisons  between  NIST  SRMs  and  such  working  measurement 
standards should take place at intervals appropriate to the conservation of the SRM primary standard and the stability 
of relevant in-house standards.  For  further guidance on how this approach can be implemented, contact  NIST  by 
email at srms@nist.gov. 
 
 
 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value Assignment of 
Reference Materials for Chemical Measurements; NIST Special Publication 260-136; U.S. Government Printing 
Office:  Washington, DC  (2000);  available  at  http://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF  (accessed 
Feb 2016). 

REFERENCES 

[2]  JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data - Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement; 
(GUM 1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology (JCGM)  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Feb 2016);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note  1297,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington,  DC  (1994);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed Feb 2016). 

[3]  Reagent Chemicals, 9th ed.: American Chemical Society: Washington, DC (1999). 
[4]  Pratt, K.W.; Automated, High-Precision Coulometric Titrimetry Part I. Engineering and Implementation; Anal. 

Chim. Acta, Vol. 289, pp. 125–134 (1994). 

[5]  Moody, J.R.;  Vetter, T.W.;  Development  of  the  Ion  Exchange-Gravimetric  Method  for  Sodium  in  Serum  as  a 
Definitive  Method;  J.  Res.  Natl.  Inst.  Stand.  Technol.,  Vol. 101,  pp. 155–164  (1996);  available  at 
http://nvl.nist.gov/pub/nistpubs/jres/101/2/j2mood.pdf (accessed Feb 2016). 

 

Certificate Revision History:  09 February 2016 (Editorial changes); 22 March 2007 (Original certificate date). 

 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
(301) 948-3730; 
telephone 
accomplished  by 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

contacting 

fax 

SRM 919b  

Page 3 of 3 

