 

 

 
SRM Supplier:   National Institute of Standards and Technology  SRM Number:   1828a 

MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEET 

  Standard Reference Materials Program 
  100 Bureau Drive, Stop 2321  
  Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899-2321 

MSDS Number:   1828a 
SRM Name:   Ethanol in Water Solutions 
Date of Issue:  06 June 2001 

MSDS Coordinator:  Carmen S. Davis 
Phone:  (301) 975-6776 
ChemTrec:  1-800-424-9300 

SECTION I.  MATERIAL IDENTIFICATION 

 

 

FAX:  (301) 926-4751 
e-mail:  SRMMSDS@nist.gov 

Material Name:  Ethanol in Water Solutions 
 
Description:    SRM  1828a  consists  of  five  ampoules:  one  ampoule  contains  approximately  20  mL  of  ethanol-water 
azeotrope (96 % mass fraction [1] ethanol, nominal); two ampoules each contain approximately 20 mL of the 2 % mass 
fraction ethanol-water solution, nominal; one ampoule contains approximately 5 mL of the 0.1 % mass fraction ethanol-
water  solution,  nominal;  and  one  ampoule  contains  approximately  5  mL  of  the  0.02  %  mass  fraction  ethanol-water 
solution, nominal. 
 
Other  Designations:    Ethanol  (ethyl  alcohol;  alcohol  anhydrous;  anhydrol;  ethyl  hydrate;  ethyl  hydroxide;  grain 
alcohol; methyl carbinol) in Water 
 
Name 
Ethanol 
 
DOT Classification:  Flammable Liquid, UN1170 
 
Manufacturer/Supplier:  Available from a number of suppliers 
 
 

CAS Registry Number 
64-17-5 

Chemical Formula 
CH3CH2OH 

SECTION II.  HAZARDOUS INGREDIENTS 

Hazardous Components 

Nominal Concentration (%) 

Exposure Limits and Toxicity Data 

 

 

Ethanol 

Concentration Level l 

Concentration Level 2 

Concentration Level 3 

Concentration Level 4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

96.0 

2.0 

0.1 

0.02 

 

 

 

 

ACGIH TLV-TWA:   1 000 mg/kg or 1900 mg/m3 

OSHA TLV-TWA:   1 000 mg/kg or 1900 mg/m3 

Man, Oral:  TDLO:   22 500 mg/kg/4 weeks 

Infant, Oral:  TDLO:   11 712 µL/kg 

Woman, Oral:  TDLO:   1 200 mg/kg/3 h 

Man, Oral:  TDLO:   3 371 µL/kg 

Man, Oral:  LDLO:   1 400 mg/kg 

Rat, Oral:  LD50:   760 mg/kg 

MSDS 1828a 

Page 1 of 4 

 

 

 

SECTION III.  PHYSICAL/CHEMICAL CHARACTERISTICS 

Ethanol 

Appearance and Odor:  a clear, colorless liquid 
with a characteristic alcoholic odor 

Vapor Pressure (@ 19 °C):   40 mm Hg 

Relative Molecular Mass:   46.07 

Evaporation Rate (carbon tetrachloride = 1):   1.4 

Density:   0.7893 g/mL 

Boiling Point:   78 °C 

Water Solubility:   soluble  

Viscosity (@ 20 °C):   1.22 cP to 1.41 cP 

Freezing Point:   -117 °C 

Solvent Solubility:   soluble in benzene, ether, 
acetone, chloroform, methanol, and organic solvents  

 
NOTE:  The physical property data are for pure ethanol. 
 
 

SECTION IV.  FIRE AND EXPLOSION HAZARD DATA 

 
Ethanol 
Flash Point:   13 °C 
 
Flammability Limits in Air (Volume %):  UPPER: 
LOWER: 

19 
3.3 

Method Used:   Closed Cup 

Autoignition Temperature:   363 °C 

 
Unusual Fire and Explosion Hazards:  Ethanol is a severe fire and explosion hazard when exposed to heat or flame. 
Vapors are heavier than air and may travel a considerable distance to a source of ignition and flash back. Vapor and air 
mixtures are explosive. 
 
Extinguishing Media:  Use alcohol-resistant foam, dry chemical, carbon dioxide, or water spray. 
 
Special Fire Procedures:  Fire fighters should wear a self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) with a full face piece 
in the pressure demand or positive mode and other protective clothing. 
 

SECTION V.  REACTIVITY DATA 

     X       Stable 

_____   Unstable 

 
Stability: 
 
Conditions to Avoid:  Avoid contact with heat, sparks, flames, or other sources of ignition.  Avoid inhalation of vapors 
or combustion by-products.  Avoid contact with the skin.  Do not allow the material to contaminate water sources. 
 
Incompatibility (Materials to Avoid):  Ethanol is incompatible with halo carbons, combustible materials, metals, metal 
oxides, oxidizing materials, halogens, metal carbide, bases, and acids. 
 
See Section IV:  Unusual Fire and Explosion Hazards 
 
Hazardous Decomposition or Byproducts:  Thermal decomposition products of ethanol may include toxic oxides of 
carbon.   
 
Hazardous Polymerization: 

    X       Will Not Occur 

_____   Will Occur 

 

 

MSDS 1828a 

Page 2 of 4 

 

 

SECTION VI.  HEALTH HAZARD DATA 

    X        Skin 

    X       Inhalation 

 
Route of Entry: 
 
Ethanol:  Inhalation of 1000 mg/kg to 10,000 mg/kg has caused temporary irritation of the upper respiratory tract and 
coughing.    If  exposure  continues,  central  nervous  system  depression  with  headache,  stupor,  fatigue,  dizziness, 
drowsiness,  and  loss  of  appetite  may  occur.    Repeated  or  prolonged  inhalation  of  vapors  may  cause  irritation  of  the 
mucous  membranes,  headache,  dizziness,  nervousness,  tremors  fatigue,  nausea,  narcosis,  lack  of  concentration,  and 
somnolence.    Direct  contact  with  the  skin  may  cause  mild  redness  and  burning.    Sensitization  has  occasionally  been 
reported  to  occur  in  some  individuals  resulting  in  allergic  contact  dermatitis  in  the  form  of  eczematous  eruptions. 
Repeated or prolonged contact with the skin can cause defatting of the tissue producing dry, fissured dermatitis.  Eye 
contact  with  the  vapor  or  liquid  may  cause  temporary  eye  irritation  with  continuous  tearing.    Repeated  contact  may 
cause hyperemia of the conjunctiva. 

    X       Ingestion 

 

Ingestion of ethanol may cause emotional lability and decreased inhibitions.  Lack of coordination, slurring of speech, 
slowing of reaction time, sensory disturbances, and visual impairment may also occur.  Other symptoms may include 
flushing  of  the  face,  dilated  pupils,  rapid  pulse,  nausea,  vomiting,  sweating,  and  diuresis.    Chronic  intoxication  may 
result in weight loss, degenerative changes in the liver, kidneys, and brain.  Gastroenteritis with anorexia and diarrhea, 
and cirrhosis of the liver.  Human consumption of alcoholic beverages has been related to the occurrence of malignant 
tumors of the oral cavity, pharynx, larynx, esophagus, and liver.  Reproductive effects have been reported in animals. 
 
Medical  Conditions  Generally  Aggravated  by  Exposure:    central  nervous  system  disorders,  and  kidney  and  liver 
disorders 
 
Listed as a Carcinogen/Potential Carcinogen: 

 
In the National Toxicology Program (NTP) Report on Carcinogens 
In the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) Monographs 
By the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 

 

 

Yes 
 
 
 

No 
X 
X 
X 

 
EMERGENCY AND FIRST AID PROCEDURES: 
 

Skin  Contact:    Remove  contaminated  shoes  and  clothing.    Rinse  affected  area  with  large  amounts  of  water 
followed  by  washing  the  area  with  soap  and  water.    Watch  for  chemical  irritations  and  treat  them  accordingly. 
Obtain medical assistance if necessary.  
 
Eye  Contact:    Immediately  flush  eyes,  including  under  the  eyelids,  with  copious  amounts  of  water  for  at  least 
15 minutes.  Obtain medical assistance. 
 
Inhalation:    If  inhaled,  move  the  victim  to  fresh  air.    If  breathing  is  difficult,  give  oxygen;  if  the  victim  is  not 
breathing, give artificial respiration.  Obtain medical assistance if necessary.  
 
Ingestion:  If ingested, wash out mouth with water.  Obtain medical assistance immediately.   

 

TARGET ORGAN(S) OF ATTACK: 
 

central nervous system and liver  

SECTION VII.  PRECAUTIONS FOR SAFE HANDLING AND USE 

 

Steps  to  be  Taken  in  Case  Material  Is  Released  or  Spilled:    Notify  safety  personnel  of  major  spills  and/or  leaks. 
Evacuate  nonessential  personnel.    Stop  the  leak  if  one  can  do  so  without  risk.    Absorb  small  spills  with  sand  or  other 
absorbent material and place into containers for disposal.  
 
Waste Disposal:  Follow all federal, state, and local laws governing disposal. 
 
Handling  and  Storage:    Persons  handling  this  material  must  wear  protective  eyewear,  clothing,  and  gloves  to  prevent 
contact with this material. 
 

MSDS 1828a 

Page 3 of 4 

 

 

NOTE:    Contact  lenses  pose  a  special  problem;  soft  lenses  may  absorb  irritants  and  all  lenses 
concentrate them.  DO NOT wear contact lenses in the laboratory. 

 
This  material  should  be  stored  in  a  cool,  dry,  well-ventilated  area  away  from  incompatible  materials  and  conditions.  
Protect containers from physical damage. 
 

 
SECTION VIII.  SOURCE DATA/OTHER COMMENTS  

Merck Index, 11th Ed., 1989. 
The Sigma Aldrich Library of Chemical Safety Data, Ed. II, 1988. 

 
Sources:  MDL Information Systems, Inc., MSDS Ethyl Alcohol, 01 December 2000. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:    Physical  and  chemical  data  contained  in  this  MSDS  are  provided  only  for  use  in  assessing  the  hazardous 
nature of the material.  The MSDS was prepared carefully, using current references; however, NIST does not certify the 
data on the MSDS.  The certified value for this material is given in the NIST Certificate of Analysis. 

MSDS 1828a 

Page 4 of 4 

