 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE:  30 May 2017 
 
Product Identifier 

SRM Number:  1932 
SRM Name: 

Fluorescein Solution 

Under the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 29 CFR 1910.1200, 
this Standard Reference Material (SRM) is NOT classified as a physical hazard or a health hazard, a simple asphyxiant, 
combustible  dust,  pyrophoric  gas,  or  hazard  not  otherwise  classified.    There  are  no  hazard  pictograms,  hazard 
statements or signal word associated with it.  Safety Data Sheet information is not required.  This document may be 
used in conjunction with your hazard communication program. 
 
Description:  This SRM is intended for use in establishing a reference scale for fluorescence intensity based upon 
Molecules  of  Equivalent  Soluble  Fluorophore (MESF)  units.    This  SRM  is  certified  for  the  concentration  of 
fluorescein with a certified purity in a borate buffer solution.  The MESF scale is established for a particular set of 
experimental conditions by measuring the fluorescence intensity of known amounts of this SRM under a specific set 
of conditions (see “Instructions for Use”).  A unit of SRM 1932 consists of three flamed sealed amber glass ampoules, 
each containing approximately 2.0 mL of fluorescein (approximately 61 µmol/kg) in an aqueous borate buffer (0.10 
mol/L).  See certificate for storage information. 

 

Disposal:  SRM 1932 should be disposed of in accordance with local, state, and federal regulations. 
 
Transport  Information:    This  material  is  not  regulated  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Transportation (DOT)  and/or 
International Air Transport Association (IATA). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:  This document was prepared carefully, using current references.  Users of this SRM should ensure that 
this document and the corresponding Certificate of Analysis in their possession are current.  This can be accomplished 
by contacting the SRM Program:  telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srmmsds@nist.gov; or via 
the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

SRM 1932 

 

Page 1 of 1 

