Date of Issue:

24 December 2013



SAFETY DATA SHEET



1. Substance and Source Identification 

	Product Identifier

		SRM Number:	2612a

		SRM Name:	Carbon Monoxide in Air (Nominal Amount-of-Substance Fraction 10 µmol/mol)

		Other Means of Identification:  Not applicable.

	Recommended Use of This Material and Restrictions of Use

This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is a primary gas mixture of carbon monoxide in air supplied in a DOT 3AL specification aluminum (6061 alloy) cylinder with a water volume of 6 L.  This SRM is intended for the calibration of instruments used for carbon monoxide determinations and for other applications.  Mixtures are shipped with a nominal pressure exceeding 12.4 MPa (1800 psig), which provides the user with 0.73 m3 (25.8 ft3) of useable mixture.  The cylinder is the property of the purchaser and is equipped with a CGA590 brass valve, which is the recommended outlet for this carbon monoxide mixture.

	Company Information

				National Institute of Standards and Technology

				

				Standard Reference Materials Program

				

				100 Bureau Drive, Stop 2300

				

				Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899-2300

				

				

	

				Telephone:  301-975-2200

	Emergency Telephone ChemTrec:

				FAX:  301-948-3730

			1-800-424-9300	(North America)

				E-mail:  SRMMSDS@nist.gov

				+1-703-527-3887	(International)

				Website:  http://www.nist.gov/srm

				

2. HAZARDS IDENTIFICATION

Classification 

		Physical Hazard:		Compressed Gas.

		Health Hazard:	Not Classified.

	Label Elements

			Symbol 

			

			Signal Word

			WARNING

			Hazard Statement(s) 

	H280	Contains gas under pressure; may explode if heated.

Precautionary Statement(s)

	P410 + P403	Protect from sunlight.  Store in a well-ventilated place.	

Hazards Not Otherwise Classified:  Not applicable.

			Ingredients(s) with Unknown Acute Toxicity:  Not applicable.

3. COMPOSITION AND INFORMATION ON HAZARDOUS INGREDIENTS

	Substance:  Carbon monoxide in air, compressed gas

	Other Designations:  

		Carbon Monoxide:  Carbon oxide, CO.

			Air:  Compressed Air.



Components are listed in compliance with OSHA’s 29 CFR 1910.1200; for the actual values see the Certificate of Analysis.  

Hazardous Components

	CAS Number

EC Number

(EINECS)

Nominal Mass Concentration
(%)

Air

		132259-10-0

Not Assigned

	>99.9

Carbon Monoxide

		630-08-0

211-128-3

	0.0010



4. FIRST AID MEASURES

Description of First Aid Measures: 

Inhalation:  If adverse effects occur, remove to uncontaminated area.  If not breathing, give artificial respiration or oxygen by qualified personnel.  Seek immediate medical attention.

Skin Contact:  Wash skin with soap and water for at least 15 minutes while removing contaminated clothing and shoes. Get medical attention, if needed.

Eye Contact:  Immediately flush eyes, including under the eyelids with copious amounts of water for at least 15 minutes.  Seek immediate medical attention.

Ingestion:  Ingestion of a gas is unlikely.  As this product is a gas, refer to the inhalation section.

Most Important Symptoms/Effects, Acute and Delayed:  Harmful if inhaled, blood damage, difficulty breathing, and suffocation.

Indication of any immediate medical attention and special treatment needed, if necessary:  If any of the above symptoms are present, seek immediate medical attention.  

5. FIRE FIGHTING MEASURES

Fire and Explosion Hazards:  Negligible fire hazard applicable to the identified NIST cylinder.  Cylinders may rupture or explode if exposed to heat.  See Section 9, “Physical and Chemical Properties” for flammability properties.

Extinguishing Media:

		Suitable:  Use extinguishing media appropriate to the surrounding fire.

		Unsuitable:  None listed.

Specific Hazards Arising from the Chemical:  Oxides of nitrogen, oxides of carbon.

Special Protective Equipment and Precautions for Fire-Fighters:  Move cylinder from fire area if it can be done without personal risk.  Avoid inhalation of material or combustion byproducts.  Wear full protective clothing and NIOSH approved self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA).

NFPA Ratings (0 = Minimal; 1 = Slight; 2 = Moderate; 3 = Serious; 4 = Severe)	

				Health = 2	Fire = 0	Reactivity = 0

6. ACCIDENTAL RELEASE MEASURES

Personal Precautions, Protective Equipment and Emergency Procedures:  Immediately contact emergency personnel.  Keep unnecessary personnel away.  Use suitable protective equipment; see Section 8, “Exposure Controls and Personal Protection”.  Shut off gas supply if this can be done safely.  Isolate area until gas has dispersed. 

Methods and Materials for Containment and Clean up:  Stop leak if possible without personal risk.  Isolate hazard area and deny entry.  Stay upwind and keep out of low areas.

7. HANDLING AND STORAGE

Safe Handling Precautions:  Use only with adequate ventilation.  Do not puncture or incinerate container.  Close valve after each use and when empty.  Keep value protection cap on cylinder when not in use.  

Storage:  Store and handling in accordance with all current regulations and standards.  Secure cylinder to prevent physical damage.  Keep separated from incompatible substances (oxidizing materials, halogens, metal oxides, metals, combustible materials, lithium).  Store in wellventilated area.  Subject to storage regulations, OSHA 29 CFR 1910.101.

8. EXPOSURE CONTROLS AND PERSONAL PROTECTION

Exposure Limits:

		Carbon Monoxide

		OSHA (PEL):	55 mg/m3 	(50 ppm) TWA

		ACGIH (TLV):	30 mg/m3 	(25 ppm) TWA

		NIOSH (REL):	40 mg/m3 	(35 ppm) TWA

			1375 mg/m3 	(1200 ppm) IDLH

			229 mg/m3 	(200 ppm) Ceiling

Engineering Controls:  Provide local exhaust or process enclosure ventilation system.  Ensure compliance with applicable exposure limits.

Personal Protection:  In accordance with OSHA 29 CFR 1910.132, subpart I, wear appropriate Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) to minimize exposure to this material.

Respiratory Protection:  If workplace conditions warrant a respirator, a respiratory protection program that meets OSHA 29 CFR 1910.134 must be followed.  Refer to NIOSH 42 CFR 84 for applicable certified respirators.

Eye/Face Protection:  Wear safety goggles. An eye wash station should be readily available near areas of use.

Skin and Body Protection:  Personal protective equipment for the body should be selected based on the task being performed and the risks involved and should be approved by a specialist before handling this product.  Chemical-resistant gloves should be worn at all times when handling chemicals.

9. PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES



Descriptive Properties

Air
(>99 % concentration in this SRM)

Appearance (physical state, color, etc.)

Colorless compressed gas

Molecular Formula

Not applicable

Molar Mass (g/mol)

Not applicable

Odor

Odorless

Odor threshold

Not available

pH

Not applicable

Evaporation rate

Not applicable

Melting point/freezing point (ºC)

–216 (–357 ºF)

Relative Density (g/L)

Not available

Density (g/cm3)

0.0012

Vapor Pressure (mmHg)

760 (–194 ºC)

Vapor Density (air = 1)

1

Viscosity (cP)

0.01853 (27 ºC)

Solubility(ies)

Slightly soluble in water

Partition coefficient (n-octanol/water)

Not available

Thermal Stability Properties



Autoignition Temperature

Not applicable

Thermal Decomposition

Not applicable

Initial boiling point and boiling range (ºC)

–194 (–317 ºF)

Explosive Limits, LEL

Not applicable

Explosive Limits, UEL

Not applicable

Flash Point

Not applicable

Flammability (solid, gas)

Not applicable



10. STABILITY AND REACTIVITY

Reactivity:  None listed.

Stability:

X

Stable



Unstable

Possible Hazardous Reactions:  None listed.

Conditions to Avoid:  Minimize contact with material.  Containers may rupture or explode if exposed to heat.

Incompatible Materials:  Oxidizing materials, halogens, metal oxides, metals, combustible materials, lithium.

Fire/Explosion Information:  See Section 5, “Fire Fighting Measures”.

Hazardous Decomposition:  Miscellaneous decomposition products. 

Hazardous Polymerization:



Will Occur

X

Will Not Occur



11. TOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION

Route of Exposure:

X

Inhalation



Skin



Ingestion

Symptoms Related to the Physical, Chemical and Toxicological Characteristics:  Nausea, vomiting, chest pain, difficulty breathing, irregular heartbeat, headache, disorientation, emotional disturbances, pain in extremities, tremors, loss of coordination, hearing loss, visual disturbances.

Potential Health Effects (Acute, Chronic and Delayed):

Inhalation:  

Carbon Monoxide:  Acute and chronic exposure may result in changes in body temperature, change in blood pressure, eye damage, suffocation, blood disorders, convulsions, unconsciousness, coma, and death.  Chronic exposure may also result in heart damage, nerve damage, birth defects, and brain damage.

Skin Contact:  No information on significant adverse effects.

Eye Contact:  Exposure may result in irritation, blurred vision.  

Ingestion:  Ingestion of a gas is unlikely under normal conditions of use.  As this product is a gas, refer to the inhalation section.

Numerical Measures of Toxicity: 

Acute Toxicity:  Not classified, concentration of carbon monoxide is below cut off value of 1 %.

Carbon monoxide; Rat, Inhalation LC50:  1807 ppm (4 h)

Skin Corrosion/Irritation:  Not applicable.

Serious Eye damage/ Eye irritation:  Not applicable.

Respiratory Sensitization:  No data available.

Skin Sensitization:  No data available.

Germ Cell Mutagenicity:  Not classified.

Carbon monoxide; Mouse: 1500 ppm (10 min)

Carcinogenicity:  Not classified.

Listed as a Carcinogen/Potential Carcinogen



Yes

X

No

Carbon monoxide is not listed in NTP, IARC or OSHA as a carcinogen.

Reproductive Toxicity:  Not classified, concentration of carbon monoxide is below cut off value of 0.1 %.

Carbon monoxide; Rat, Inhalation TCLo:  103 mg/m3 (pregnant, 1 d to 22 d).

Specific Target Organ Toxicity, Single Exposure:  Not classified.

Specific Target Organ Toxicity, Repeated Exposure:  Not classified, concentration of carbon monoxide is below cut off value of 1 %.

Aspiration Hazard:  No data available.  


12. ECOLOGICAL INFORMATION

Ecotoxicity Data:

		Carbon Monoxide

Minnows and sunfish species, lethal dose: 1.5 ppm (1 h to 6 h, fresh water)

Persistence and Degradability:  No data available. 

Bioaccumulative Potential:  No data available. 

Mobility in Soil:  No data available.

Other Adverse effects:  No data available.

13. DISPOSAL CONSIDERATIONS

Waste Disposal:  Dispose of waste in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations.  Carbon monoxide subject to disposal regulations, U.S. EPA 40 CFR 262, Hazardous Waste Number: D001.

14. TRANSPORTATION INFORMATION

U.S. DOT and IATA:  UN1956; Compressed gas, n.o.s. (carbon monoxide in air); Hazard Class 2.2.

15. REGULATORY INFORMATION

U.S. Regulations:

CERCLA Sections 102a/103 (40 CFR 302.4):  Identified cylinder not regulated.   

SARA Title III Section 302 (40 CFR 355.30):  Identified cylinder not regulated.  

SARA Title III Section 304 (40 CFR 355.40):  Identified cylinder not regulated

SARA Title III Section 313 (40 CFR 372.65):  Identified cylinder not regulated.

OSHA Process Safety (29 CFR 1910.119):  Identified cylinder not regulated.  

SARA Title III Sections 311/312 Hazardous Categories (40 CFR 370.21):

	ACUTE HEALTH:	No.

	CHRONIC HEALTH:	No.

	FIRE:	No.

	REACTIVE:	No.

	PRESSURE:	Yes.

State Regulations:

California Proposition 65:  WARNING! This product contains a chemical (carbon monoxide) known to the state of California to cause reproductive/developmental effects.

U.S. TSCA Inventory:  Carbon monoxide listed.  

TSCA 12(b), Export Notification:  No components are listed.

Canadian Regulations:

WHMIS Information: Not provided for this material.










16. OTHER INFORMATION

Issue Date:  24 December 2013

	Sources:	ChemADVISOR, Inc., MSDS, Compressed Air, Breathing Air, 18 June 2012.

	ChemADVISOR, Inc., MSDS, Carbon Monoxide, 11 September 2013.

	National Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency, CAMEO Chemicals Database, CAS No. 630-08-0, CRIS Code: CMO; available at http://cameochemicals.noaa.gov/chris/CMO.pdf (accessed Dec 2013)

					

					

					

					Key of Acronyms:  

ACGIH

American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists

NRC

Nuclear Regulatory Commission

ALI

Annual Limit on Intake

NTP 

National Toxicology Program

CAS 

Chemical Abstracts Service 

OSHA 

Occupational Safety and Health Administration 

CERCLA 

Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 

PEL 

Permissible Exposure Limit

CFR 

Code of Federal Regulations 

RCRA 

Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 

DOT 

Department of Transportation 

REL 

Recommended Exposure Limit 

EINECS

European Inventory of Existing Commercial Chemical Substances 

RQ 

Reportable Quantity 

EPCRA 

Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act 

RTECS

Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances

IARC 

International Agency for Research on Cancer 

SARA 

Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act 

IATA 

International Air Transportation Agency 

SCBA 

SelfContained Breathing Apparatus 

IDLH 

Immediately Dangerous to Life and Health 

SRM 

Standard Reference Material 

LC50

Lethal Concentration 

STEL 

Short  Term Exposure Limit

LD50

Median Lethal Dose or Lethal Dose, 50 %

TLV 

Threshold Limit Value 

LEL 

Lower Explosive Limit 

TPQ 

Threshold Planning Quantity 

MSDS 

Material Safety Data Sheet 

TSCA 

Toxic Substances Control Act 

NFPA 

National Fire Protection Association 

TWA 

Time Weighted Average 

NIOSH 

National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 

UEL 

Upper Explosive Limit 

NIST

National Institute of Standards and Technology

WHMIS

Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System

n.o.s.

Not Otherwise Specified





					

					















Disclaimer:  Physical and chemical data contained in this SDS are provided only for use in assessing the hazardous nature of the material.  The SDS was prepared carefully, using current references; however, NIST does not certify the data in the SDS. The certified values for this material are given in the NIST Certificate of Analysis.

Users of this SRM should ensure that the SDS in their possession is current. This can be accomplished by contacting the SRM Program: telephone (301) 9752200; fax (301) 9483730; e-mail srmmsds@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm.

			SRM 2612a		Page 1 of 6