Date of Issue: 

06 May 2019



SAFETY DATA SHEET



1. Substance and Source Identification 

	Product Identifier

		SRM Number:	2646a

		SRM Name:	Propane in Nitrogen (Nominal Amount-of-Substance Fraction 1000 mol/mol)

		Other Means of Identification:  Not applicable.

	Recommended Use of This Material and Restrictions of Use

This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is a primary gas mixture for which the amount-of-substance fraction, expressed as concentration, may be related to secondary working standards.  This SRM is intended for the calibration of instruments used for propane determinations and for other applications.  This SRM mixture is supplied in a DOT 3AL specification aluminum (6061 alloy) cylinder with a water volume of 6 L.  Mixtures are shipped with a nominal pressure exceeding 12.1 MPa (1750 psig), which provides the user with 0.71 m3 (25.1 ft3) of useable mixture.  The cylinder is the property of the purchaser and is equipped with a CGA350 brass valve, which is the recommended outlet for this propane mixture.

	Company Information

				National Institute of Standards and Technology

				

				Standard Reference Materials Program

				

				100 Bureau Drive, Stop 2300

				

				Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899-2300

				

				

	

				Telephone:  301-975-2200

	Emergency Telephone ChemTrec:

				FAX:  301-948-3730

			1-800-424-9300	(North America)

				E-mail:  SRMMSDS@nist.gov

				+1-703-527-3887	(International)

				Website:  https://www.nist.gov/srm

				

	

2. HAZARDS IDENTIFICATION

Classification 

Classification 

	Physical Hazard:	Compressed Gas

		Health Hazard:	Simple Asphyxiant

	Label Elements

			Symbol 

				

			Signal Word

			WARNING

			Hazard Statement(s)

	H280	Contains gas under pressure; may explode if heated.

	------	May displace oxygen and cause rapid suffocation.

	

Precautionary Statement(s)

	P410+P403	Protect from sunlight.  Store in a wellventilated place.

Hazards Not Otherwise Classified:  Not applicable.

			Ingredients(s) with Unknown Acute Toxicity:  Not applicable.

3. COMPOSITION AND INFORMATION ON HAZARDOUS INGREDIENTS

	Substance: Propane in nitrogen, compressed gas

	Other Designations:

		Propane:  n-Propane; dimethyl methane; propyl hydride; propylhydride; liquefied petroleum gas; LPG.

		Nitrogen:  Dinitrogen; nitrogen compressed.

Components are listed in compliance with OSHA’s 29 CFR 1910.1200; for the actual values see the Certificate of Analysis.

Hazardous Component(s)

	CAS Number

EC Number

(EINECS)

Nominal Mass Concentration
(%)

Nitrogen

		7727-37-9

	231-783-9

	>99

Propane

		74-98-6

	200-827-9

	0.1



4. FIRST AID MEASURES

Description of First Aid Measures

Inhalation:  If adverse effects occur, remove to uncontaminated area.  If not breathing, give artificial respiration or oxygen by qualified personnel.  Seek immediate medical attention.

Skin Contact:  Not applicable.

Eye Contact:  Immediately flush eyes, including under the eyelids with copious amounts of water for at least 15 minutes.  Seek immediate medical attention.

Ingestion:  Ingestion of a gas is unlikely.

Most Important Symptoms/Effects, Acute and Delayed:  Potentially fatal if inhaled.

Indication of any immediate medical attention and special treatment needed, if necessary:  If any of the above symptoms are present, seek immediate medical attention.

5. FIRE FIGHTING MEASURES

Fire and Explosion Hazards:  Negligible fire hazard applicable to the identified NIST cylinder.  Cylinders may rupture or explode if exposed to heat.  See Section 9, “Physical and Chemical Properties” for flammability properties.

Extinguishing Media:

		Suitable:  Use extinguishing media appropriate to the surrounding fire.

		Unsuitable:  None listed.

Specific Hazards Arising from the Chemical:  Oxides of carbon.

Special Protective Equipment and Precautions for Fire-Fighters:  Move cylinder from fire area if it can be done without personal risk.  Avoid inhalation of material or combustion byproducts.  Wear full protective clothing and NIOSH approved self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA).

NFPA Ratings (0 = Minimal; 1 = Slight; 2 = Moderate; 3 = Serious; 4 = Severe)

				Health = 0	Fire = 0	Reactivity = 0

6. ACCIDENTAL RELEASE MEASURES

Personal Precautions, Protective Equipment and Emergency Procedures:  Immediately contact emergency personnel.  Keep unnecessary personnel away.  Use suitable protective equipment; see Section 8, “Exposure Controls and Personal Protection”.  Shut off gas supply if this can be done safely.  Isolate area until gas has dispersed.

Methods and Materials for Containment and Clean up:  Stop leak if possible without personal risk.  Isolate hazard area and deny entry.  Stay upwind and keep out of low areas.

7. HANDLING AND STORAGE

Safe Handling Precautions:  Close valve after each use and when empty.  Keep valve protection cap on cylinder when not in use.

Storage:  Store and handle in accordance with all current regulations and standards.  Secure cylinder to prevent physical damage.  Keep separated from incompatible substances (see Section 10, “Stability and Reactivity”).  Store in wellventilated area.  Subject to storage regulations, OSHA 29 CFR 1910.101.

8. EXPOSURE CONTROLS AND PERSONAL PROTECTION



Exposure Limits

Components

OSHA (PEL)

ACGIH (TLV)

NIOSH (REL)

Nitrogen

simple asphxiant

Propane

TWA:  1800 mg/m3 (1000 ppm)

TWA:  1800 mg/m3 (1000 ppm)

TWA:  1800 mg/m3 (1000 ppm)

IDLH:  2100 mg/m3 (10 % LEL)

Engineering Controls:  Provide local exhaust or process enclosure ventilation system.  Ensure compliance with applicable exposure limits.

Personal Protection:  In accordance with OSHA 29 CFR 1910.132, subpart I, wear appropriate Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) to minimize exposure to this material.

Respiratory Protection:  If workplace conditions warrant a respirator, a respiratory protection program that meets OSHA 29CFR 1910.134 must be followed.  Refer to NIOSH 42 CFR 84 for applicable certified respirators.

Eye/Face Protection:  Wear splash resistant safety goggles with a face shield.  An eyewash station should be readily available near areas of use.

Skin and Body Protection:  Personal protective equipment for the body should be selected based on the task being performed and the risks involved and should be approved by a specialist before handling this product.  Chemical-resistant gloves should be worn at all times when handling chemicals.

9. PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES



Descriptive Properties

Nitrogen
(>99 %)

Appearance (physical state, color, etc.)

colorless compressed gas

Molecular Formula

N2

Molar Mass (g/mol)

28

Odor

odorless

Odor threshold

not available

pH

not applicable

Evaporation rate

not applicable

Melting point/freezing point

–210 ºC (–346 ºF)

Relative Density

1.2506

Vapor Pressure 

760 mmHg at –196 ºC

Vapor Density (air = 1)

0.967

Viscosity (cP)

0.01787 at 27 ºC

Solubility(ies)

water (1.6 % at 20 ºC)
liquid ammonia

Partition coefficient (n-octanol/water)

not available

Thermal Stability Properties



Autoignition Temperature

not applicable

Thermal Decomposition

not applicable

Initial boiling point and boiling range

–196 ºC (–321 ºF)

Explosive Limits, LEL

not applicable

Explosive Limits, UEL

not applicable

Flash Point

not applicable

Flammability (solid, gas)

not applicable



10. STABILITY AND REACTIVITY

Reactivity:  Stable at normal pressure and temperature.

Stability:

X

Stable



Unstable

Possible Hazardous Reactions:  None listed.

Conditions to Avoid:  Avoid heat, flames, sparks, and other sources of ignition.  Minimize contact with material.  Containers may rupture or explode if exposed to heat.

Incompatible Materials:  No data available.

Fire/Explosion Information:  See Section 5, “Fire Fighting Measures”.

Hazardous Decomposition:  Miscellaneous decomposition products.

Hazardous Polymerization:



Will Occur

X

Will Not Occur



11. TOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION

Route of Exposure:

X

Inhalation



Skin



Ingestion

Symptoms Related to the Physical, Chemical and Toxicological Characteristics:  Nausea, headache, weakness, drowsiness.

Potential Health Effects (Acute, Chronic and Delayed):

Inhalation:  Nitrogen compressed gas is a simple asphyxiant.  Release in an enclosed space may result in asphyxiation.  The symptoms of asphyxia depend on the rapidity with which the oxygen deficiency develops and how long it continues.  In sudden acute asphyxia, unconsciousness may be immediate.  With slow development, there may be rapid respiration and pulse, air hunger, dizziness, reduced awareness, tightness in the head, tingling sensations, incoordination, faulty judgment, emotional instability, and rapid fatigue.  As the asphyxia progresses, nausea, vomiting, collapse, unconsciousness, convulsions, deep coma, and death are possible. 

Skin Contact:  No information on significant adverse effects.

Eye Contact:  No information on significant adverse effects.

Ingestion:  Ingestion of a gas is unlikely under normal conditions of use.

Numerical Measures of Toxicity: 

Acute Toxicity:  Not classified, the concentration of propane is below the cut off value of 1 %.

	Propane:  Rat, Inhalation LC50:  658 mg/L (4 h); >800 000 ppm (15 min)

Skin Corrosion/Irritation:  Not applicable.

Serious Eye Damage/Eye Irritation:  Not applicable.

Respiratory Sensitization:  No data available.

Skin Sensitization:  No data available.

Germ Cell Mutagenicity:  Not classified.

Carcinogenicity:  Not classified.

Listed as a Carcinogen/Potential Carcinogen



Yes

X

No

Propane and nitrogen are not listed by NTP, IARC or OSHA as a carcinogen/potential carcinogen.

Reproductive Toxicity:  Not classified.

Specific Target Organ Toxicity, Single Exposure:  Not classified; the concentration of propane is below the cut off value of 1 %.  

Specific Target Organ Toxicity, Repeated Exposure:  Not classified.

Aspiration Hazard:  No data available.  

12. ECOLOGICAL INFORMATION

Ecotoxicity Data:  No data available.

Persistence and Degradability:  No data available.

Bioaccumulative Potential:  No data available.

Mobility in Soil:  No data available.

Other Adverse effects:  No data available.

13. DISPOSAL CONSIDERATIONS

Waste Disposal:  Dispose of waste in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations.  Subject to disposal regulations (propane), U.S. EPA 40 CFR 262, Hazardous Waste Number: D001.

14. TRANSPORTATION INFORMATION

U.S. DOT and IATA:  UN1956; compressed gas, n.o.s. (propane in nitrogen); Hazard Class 2.2.

15. REGULATORY INFORMATION

U.S. Regulations:

CERCLA Sections 102a/103 (40 CFR 302.4):  Identified cylinder not regulated.

SARA Title III Section 302 (40 CFR 355.30):  Identified cylinder not regulated.

SARA Title III Section 304 (40 CFR 355.40):  Identified cylinder not regulated.

SARA Title III Section 313 (40 CFR 372.65):  Identified cylinder not regulated.

OSHA Process Safety (29 CFR 1910.119):  Identified cylinder not regulated.

SARA Title III Sections 311/312 Hazardous Categories (40 CFR 370.21):

	ACUTE HEALTH:	Yes.

	CHRONIC HEALTH:	No.

	FIRE:	No.

	REACTIVE:	No.

	PRESSURE:	Yes.

State Regulations:

California Proposition 65:  Not regulated.

U.S. TSCA Inventory:  Propane and nitrogen are listed.

TSCA 12(b), Export Notification:  Not listed.

Canadian Regulations:  WHMIS Information is not provided for this material.




16. OTHER INFORMATION

	Issue Date:	06 May 2019

	Sources:	ChemADVISOR, Inc., SDS, Propane, 09 December 2015.

	ChemADVISOR, Inc., SDS, Nitrogen, Compressed Gas, 09 December 2015.

	National Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency, CAMEO Chemicals Database, Propane CAS No. 74986, June 1999, CRIS Code: PRP; available at https://cameochemicals.noaa.gov/chris/PRP.pdf (accessed Apr 2019).

					





					

					Key of Acronyms:

ACGIH

American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists

NRC

Nuclear Regulatory Commission

ALI

Annual Limit on Intake

NTP 

National Toxicology Program

CAS 

Chemical Abstracts Service 

OSHA 

Occupational Safety and Health Administration 

CERCLA 

Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 

PEL 

Permissible Exposure Limit

CFR 

Code of Federal Regulations 

RCRA 

Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 

DOT 

Department of Transportation 

REL 

Recommended Exposure Limit 

EC50

Effective Concentration, 50 %

RM

Reference Material

EINECS

European Inventory of Existing Commercial Chemical Substances 

RQ 

Reportable Quantity 

EPCRA 

Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act 

RTECS

Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances

IARC 

International Agency for Research on Cancer 

SARA 

Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act 

IATA 

International Air Transport Association

SCBA 

SelfContained Breathing Apparatus 

IDLH 

Immediately Dangerous to Life and Health 

SRM 

Standard Reference Material 

LC50

Lethal Concentration, 50 % 

STEL 

Short Term Exposure Limit 

LD50

Lethal Dose, 50 %

STOT

Specific Target Organ Toxicity

LEL 

Lower Explosive Limit 

TLV 

Threshold Limit Value 

MSDS 

Material Safety Data Sheet 

TPQ 

Threshold Planning Quantity 

NFPA 

National Fire Protection Association 

TSCA 

Toxic Substances Control Act 

NIOSH 

National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 

TWA 

Time Weighted Average 

NIST

National Institute of Standards and Technology

UEL 

Upper Explosive Limit 

n.o.s.

Not Otherwise Specified

WHMIS

Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System



					































Disclaimer:  Physical and chemical data contained in this SDS are provided only for use in assessing the hazardous nature of the material.  The SDS was prepared carefully, using current references; however, NIST does not certify the data in the SDS.  The certified values for this material are given in the NIST Certificate of Analysis.

Users of this SRM should ensure that the SDS in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished by contacting the SRM Program: telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srmmsds@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm.

			SRM 2646a		Page 6 of 6