Date of Issue: 

18 May 2015



SAFETY DATA SHEET



1. Substance and Source Identification 

	Product Identifier

		SRM Number:	2881

		SRM Name:	Polystyrene Absolute Molecular Mass Distribution Standard

		Other Means of Identification:  Not applicable.

	Recommended Use of This Material and Restrictions of Use

This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended for the calibration and the performance evaluation of instruments used to determine the average molecular mass and molecular mass distribution of synthetic polymers (where mass is taken to be relative to the mass of 12C).  A unit of SRM 2881 consists of approximately 0.3 g of polystyrene powder.

	Company Information

				National Institute of Standards and Technology

				

				Standard Reference Materials Program

				

				100 Bureau Drive, Stop 2300

				

				Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899-2300

				

				

	

				Telephone:  301-975-2200

	Emergency Telephone ChemTrec:

				FAX:  301-948-3730

			1-800-424-9300	(North America)

				E-mail:  SRMMSDS@nist.gov

				+1-703-527-3887	(International)

				Website:  http://www.nist.gov/srm

				

2. HAZARDS IDENTIFICATION

Note:  SRM 2881 is supplied in a small quantity and under normal laboratory conditions it does not constitute a combustible dust hazard.  The physical properties of this material indicate that accumulated dust on surfaces generated where operations produce fine particulates, may lead to combustible dust concentrations in air.

Classification

		Physical Hazard:	Not classified.

		Health Hazard:	Not classified.

		

		Label Elements

			Symbol:  No Symbol/No Pictogram.

			Signal Word:  No Signal Word

Hazard Statement(s):  Not applicable.

Precautionary Statement(s):  Not applicable.

Hazards Not Otherwise Classified:  Not applicable.

			Ingredients(s) with Unknown Acute Toxicity:  Not applicable.

3. COMPOSITION AND INFORMATION ON HAZARDOUS INGREDIENTS

	Substance:  Polystyrene

	Other Designations:  Styrene polymer; ethenylbenzene homopolymer; ethenylene; oligostyrene; poly(vinylbenzene).

Components are listed in compliance with OSHA’s 29 CFR 1910.1200; for the actual values see the NIST Certificate of Analysis.

Hazardous Component(s)

	CAS Number

EC Number

(EINECS)

Nominal Mass Concentration 
(%)

Polystyrene powder

	9003-53-6

500-008-9

100

4. FIRST AID MEASURES

Description of First Aid Measures: 

Inhalation:  If adverse effects occur, remove to uncontaminated area.  If not breathing, give artificial respiration or oxygen by qualified personnel.  Seek immediate medical attention.

Skin Contact:  Wash skin with soap and water for at least 15 minutes.  Thoroughly clean and dry contaminated clothing before reuse.

Eye Contact:  Flush eyes with water for at least 15 minutes.  If necessary, seek medical attention.

Ingestion:  If adverse effects occur after ingestion, seek medical treatment.

Most Important Symptoms/Effects, Acute and Delayed:  Skin or eye mechanical irritation. 

Indication of any immediate medical attention and special treatment needed, if necessary:  If any of the above symptoms are present, seek medical attention if needed.

5. FIRE FIGHTING MEASURES

Fire and Explosion Hazards:  Avoid generating dust; sufficient concentrations of fine dust dispersed in air, and in the presence of an ignition source is a potential hazard.  See Section 9, “Physical and Chemical Properties” for flammability properties.

Extinguishing Media:

		Suitable:  Regular dry chemical, carbon dioxide, water, and regular foam.

		Unsuitable:  None listed.

Specific Hazards Arising from the Chemical:  None listed.

Special Protective Equipment and Precautions for Fire-Fighters:  Avoid inhalation of material or combustion byproducts.  Wear full protective clothing and NIOSH approved self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA).

NFPA Ratings (0 = Minimal; 1 = Slight; 2 = Moderate; 3 = Serious; 4 = Severe)	

				Health = 1	Fire = 1	Reactivity = 0

6. ACCIDENTAL RELEASE MEASURES

Personal Precautions, Protective Equipment and Emergency Procedures:  Any accumulated material on surfaces should be removed and properly disposed of.  Use suitable protective equipment; see Section 8, “Exposure Controls and Personal Protection”.

Methods and Materials for Containment and Clean up:  Do not touch spilled material.  Notify safety personnel of spills.  Collect spilled material in appropriate container for disposal.  Isolate hazard area and deny entry.

7. HANDLING AND STORAGE

Safe Handling Precautions:  Minimize dust generation and accumulation on surfaces.  See Section 8, “Exposure Controls and Personal Protection”.

Storage:  Store and handle in accordance with all current regulations and standards.  Keep separated from incompatible substances; see Section 10, “Stability and Reactivity”.

8. EXPOSURE CONTROLS AND PERSONAL PROTECTION

Exposure Limits:  This material is a particulate matter and adequate inhalation/respiratory protection should be used to minimize exposure.  No occupational exposure limits have been established for polystyrene.  The exposure limits for Particulates Not Otherwise Regulated are applicable.

		OSHA (PEL):	15 mg/m3 (TWA, total particulates)

			5 mg/m3 (TWA, respirable particulates)

Engineering Controls:  Provide local exhaust or process enclosure ventilation system.  Ensure compliance with applicable exposure limits.

Personal Protection:  In accordance with OSHA 29 CFR 1910.132, subpart I, wear appropriate Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) to minimize exposure to this material.

Respiratory Protection:  If workplace conditions warrant a respirator, a respiratory protection program that meets OSHA 29CFR 1910.134 must be followed.  Refer to NIOSH 42 CFR 84 for applicable certified respirators.

Eye/Face Protection:  Wear splash resistant safety goggles with a face shield.  An eye wash station should be readily available near areas of use.

Skin and Body Protection:  Personal protective equipment for the body should be selected based on the task being performed and the risks involved and should be approved by a specialist before handling this product.  Chemical-resistant gloves should be worn at all times when handling chemicals.

9.  Physical and Chemical Properties



Descriptive Properties:

Polystyrene

Appearance 
(physical state, color, etc.):

Colorless to white powder

Molecular Formula:

(CH(C6H5)-CH2)x

Molar Mass (g/mol):

not applicable

Odor:

not available

Odor threshold:

not available

pH:

not available

Evaporation rate:

not applicable

Melting point/freezing point (ºC):

240 (464 ºF)

Relative Density (water = 1):

1.04 to 1.13

Vapor Pressure (mmHg):

not applicable

Vapor Density (air = 1):

not applicable

Viscosity (cP):

not applicable

Solubility(ies):

insoluble in water; insoluble in alcohols, alkali, nonoxidizying acids, phenol, and acetone; soluble in ethyl benzene, methyl isobutyl ketone, tetrahydrofuran, benzene, toluene, dichloromethane, pyridines

Partition coefficient (n-octanol/water):

not available

Particle Size (if relevant)

not available

Thermal Stability Properties:



Autoignition Temperature (ºC):

488 to 496 (910 to 925 ºF)

Thermal Decomposition (ºC):

not available

Initial boiling point and boiling range (ºC):

not available

Explosive Limits, LEL (Volume %):

not available

Explosive Limits, UEL (Volume %):

not available

Flash Point (ºC)

345 to 360 (653 to 680 ºF)

Flammability (solid, gas):

not available



10.  Stability and Reactivity

Reactivity:  Stable at normal temperatures and pressure.

Stability:

X

Stable



Unstable

Possible Hazardous Reactions:  None listed.

Conditions to Avoid:  Avoid generating dust.  Avoid heat, flames, sparks and other sources of ignition.  Avoid contact with incompatible materials.

Incompatible Materials:  Oxidizing materials, combustible materials.

Fire/Explosion Information:  See Section 5, “Fire Fighting Measures”.

Hazardous Decomposition:  Oxides of carbon and styrene.

Hazardous Polymerization:



Will Occur

X

Will Not Occur



11. TOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION



Route of Exposure:

X

Inhalation

X

Skin

X

Ingestion

Symptoms Related to the Physical, Chemical and Toxicological Characteristics:  No data available.

Potential Health Effects (Acute, Chronic and Delayed):

Inhalation:  High concentrations of dust may cause irritation.  Fumes from heated of burning polystyrene may cause irritation of the nose, throat and lungs.

Skin Contact:  Skin exposure may result in mechanical irritation.

Eye Contact:  Dust may cause mechanical irritation.  Fumes from heated of burning polystyrene may cause irritation and tearing.

Ingestion:  No data available.

Numerical Measures of Toxicity:

Acute Toxicity:  Not classified.

	Rat, Inhalation LC50: 56.6 g/m3 30 minutes

Skin Corrosion/Irritation:  Not classified; no data available.

Serious Eye damage/ Eye irritation:  Not classified; no data available.

Respiratory Sensitization:  Not classified; no data available.

Skin Sensitization:  Not classified; no data available.

Germ Cell Mutagenicity:  Not classified.

Carcinogenicity:  Not classified.

Listed as a Carcinogen/Potential Carcinogen



Yes

X

No

	Polystyrene is not listed by NTP, IARC or OSHA as a carcinogen.

Reproductive Toxicity:  Not classified; no data available.

Specific Target Organ Toxicity, Single Exposure:  Not classified; no data available.

Specific Target Organ Toxicity, Repeated Exposure:  Not classified; no data available.

Aspiration Hazard:  Not classified; no data available.

12. ECOLOGICAL INFORMATION

Ecotoxicity Data:  No data available

Persistence and Degradability:  No data available.

Bioaccumulative Potential:  No data available.

Mobility in Soil:  No data available.

Other Adverse effects:  No data available.

13. DISPOSAL CONSIDERATIONS

Waste Disposal:  Dispose of waste in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations.

14. TRANSPORTATION INFORMATION

U.S. DOT and IATA:  Not regulated by DOT or IATA.

15. REGULATORY INFORMATION

U.S. Regulations:

CERCLA Sections 102a/103 (40 CFR 302.4):  Not regulated.

SARA Title III Section 302 (40 CFR 355.30):  Not regulated.

SARA Title III Section 304 (40 CFR 355.40):  Not regulated.

SARA Title III Section 313 (40 CFR 372.65):  Not regulated.

OSHA Process Safety (29 CFR 1910.119):  Not regulated.

SARA Title III Sections 311/312 Hazardous Categories (40 CFR 370.21):

	ACUTE HEALTH:	No.

	CHRONIC HEALTH:	No.

	FIRE:	No.

	REACTIVE:	No.

	PRESSURE:	No.

State Regulations:

California Proposition 65:  Not listed.

U.S. TSCA Inventory:  Polystyrene is listed.

TSCA 12(b), Export Notification:  Not listed.

Canadian Regulations:

WHMIS Information: Not provided for this material.

16. OTHER INFORMATION

Issue Date:  18 May 2015

	Sources:	ChemADVISOR, Inc., SDS Polystyrene, 20 March 2015

		CDC; NIOSH; NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards; Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), National Institute for Safety and Health; Particulates not otherwise regulated, 4 April 2011; available at http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npg/npgd0480.html (accessed May 2015).

	

					Key of Acronyms:

ACGIH

American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists

NRC

Nuclear Regulatory Commission

ALI

Annual Limit on Intake

NTP 

National Toxicology Program

CAS 

Chemical Abstracts Service 

OSHA 

Occupational Safety and Health Administration 

CERCLA 

Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 

PEL 

Permissible Exposure Limit

CFR 

Code of Federal Regulations 

RCRA 

Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 

DOT 

Department of Transportation 

REL 

Recommended Exposure Limit 

EC50

Effective Concentration, 50 %

RM

Reference Material

EINECS

European Inventory of Existing Commercial Chemical Substances 

RQ 

Reportable Quantity 

EPCRA 

Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act 

RTECS

Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances

IARC 

International Agency for Research on Cancer 

SARA 

Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act 

IATA 

International Air Transportation Agency 

SCBA 

SelfContained Breathing Apparatus 

IDLH 

Immediately Dangerous to Life and Health 

SRM 

Standard Reference Material 

LC50

Lethal Concentration, 50 % 

STEL 

Short Term Exposure Limit 

LD50

Lethal Dose, 50 %

TLV 

Threshold Limit Value 

LEL 

Lower Explosive Limit 

TPQ 

Threshold Planning Quantity 

MSDS 

Material Safety Data Sheet 

TSCA 

Toxic Substances Control Act 

NFPA 

National Fire Protection Association 

TWA 

Time Weighted Average 

NIOSH 

National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 

UEL 

Upper Explosive Limit 

NIST

National Institute of Standards and Technology

WHMIS

Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System



Disclaimer:  Physical and chemical data contained in this SDS are provided only for use in assessing the hazardous nature of the material.  The SDS was prepared carefully, using current references; however, NIST does not certify the data in the SDS.  The certified values for this material are given in the NIST Certificate of Analysis.

Users of this SRM should ensure that the SDS in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished by contacting the SRM Program: telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srmmsds@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm.

			SRM 2881		Page 4 of 5