 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE:  19 December 2017 
 
Product Identifier 

SRM Number:    2941 
SRM Name:    Relative Intensity Correction Standard for Fluorescence Spectroscopy:  Green Emission  

Under the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 29 CFR 1910.1200, 
this Standard Reference Material (SRM) is NOT classified as a physical hazard or a health hazard, a simple asphyxiant, 
combustible  dust,  pyrophoric  gas,  or  hazard  not  otherwise  classified.  There  are  no  hazard  pictograms,  hazard 
statements or signal word associated with it.  Safety Data Sheet information is not required.  This document may be 
used in conjunction with your hazard communication program. 
 
Exemption:    1910.1200  (c).    This  SRM  is  an  Article,  as  the  word  is  defined  by  OSHA,  where  Article  means  a 
manufactured item other than a fluid or particle: (i) which is formed to a specific shape or design during manufacture; 
(ii) which has end use function(s) dependent in whole or in part upon its shape or design during end use; and (iii) 
which under normal conditions of use does not release more than very small quantities, e.g., minute or trace amounts 
of a hazardous chemical (as determined under paragraph (d) of 1910.1200), and does not pose a physical hazard or 
health risk to employees.  
 

Description:   This SRM is intended for use for the evaluation and calibration of the relative spectral responsivity 
of steady-state fluorescence spectrometers with a continuous excitation source and for determining the day-to-day 
or instrument-to-instrument intensity variations of a single or similar fluorescence instrument(s), respectively.  A 
unit of SRM 2941 consists of a single cuvette-shaped piece of solid glass. 
 
Disposal:  SRM 2941 should be disposed of in accordance with local, state, and federal regulations. 
 
Transport  Information:    This  material  is  not  regulated  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Transportation  (DOT)  and/or 
International Air Transport Association (IATA). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:   This document was prepared carefully, using current references.  Users of this SRM should ensure that 
this document and the corresponding Certificate of Analysis in their possession are current. This can be accomplished 
by contacting the SRM Program:  telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srmmsds@nist.gov; or via 
the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

SRM 2941 

 

Page 1 of 1 

