Date of Issue: 
22 May 2015 

 
SAFETY DATA SHEET 

1.  SUBSTANCE AND SOURCE IDENTIFICATION  

 

Product Identifier 

SRM Number:  2960 
SRM Name: 
 
Other Means of Identification:  Not applicable. 

Respirable Cristobalite on Filter Media 
(Nominal Mass of Cristobalite, 5 µg – 250 µg) 

Recommended Use of This Material and Restrictions of Use 

This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended primarily for the calibration of X-ray diffraction (XRD) 
spectrometers for the determination of respirable cristobalite using National Institute for Occupational Safety 
and  Health  (NIOSH)  Method  7500,  or  equivalent  method.    The  SRM  was  produced  by  depositing  a  known 
amount of SRM 1879a Respirable Cristobalite as a slurry on a 25 mm diameter polyvinyl chloride (PVC) filter.  
A unit of SRM 2960 consists of 30 blank PVC filters containing no cristobalite and 5 loaded PVC filters at each 
of the following nominal levels: 5 μg, 10 μg, 20 μg, 50 μg, 100 μg, and 250 μg.  The blank filters and the loaded 
filters are stored in two clear plastic petri dishes, respectively, with blue spacer sheets separating the filters. 

Company Information 

National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Standard Reference Materials Program 
100 Bureau Drive, Stop 2300 
Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899-2300 
 
Telephone:  301-975-2200 
FAX:  301-948-3730 
E-mail:  SRMMSDS@nist.gov 
Website:  http://www.nist.gov/srm 

 
 
 
 
 
Emergency Telephone ChemTrec: 
  1-800-424-9300 
 +1-703-527-3887 
 

(North America) 
(International) 

2.  HAZARDS IDENTIFICATION 

Note:  The particulate material on the filter is respirable cristobalite.  The health and physical hazard information 
provided in this SDS contains the effects associated with the inhalation of cristobalite particulates. 

Classification  

Physical Hazard:  Not classified. 
Health Hazard:  Carcinogen 
 

Category 1 
 
STOT, Repeated Exposure   Category 1 

Label Elements 
Symbol  

 

Signal Word 
DANGER 

Hazard Statement(s): 
H350 
H372 

May cause lung cancer. 
Causes damage to lungs through prolonged or repeated inhalation. 

Precautionary Statement(s): 
P201 
P202 
P260 
P264 
P270 

Obtain special instructions before use. 
Do not handle until all safety precautions have been read and understood. 
Do not breathe dust. 
Wash hands thoroughly after handling. 
Do not eat, drink or smoke when using this product. 

SRM 2960 

 

Page 1 of 6 

P280 

Wear protective gloves, protective clothing, and eye protection. 

P308 + P313 

If exposed or concerned:  Get medical attention. 

P405 

P501 

Store locked up. 

Dispose of contents and container in accordance with local regulations. 

Hazards Not Otherwise Classified:  Not applicable. 

Ingredients(s) with Unknown Acute Toxicity:  Not applicable. 

3.  COMPOSITION AND INFORMATION ON HAZARDOUS INGREDIENTS 

Substance:  α-Cristobalite 

Other Designations: Silica; silicon dioxide; crystalline silica; white silica sand; silicic anhydride; SiO2  

Components are listed in compliance with OSHA’s 29 CFR 1910.1200; for the actual values see the NIST Certificate 
of Analysis. 

Hazardous Component(s)  CAS Number 

14464-46-1 

100 

EC Number 
(EINECS) 

238-455-4 

Nominal Mass Concentration 
(%) 

Cristobalite 

 

4.  FIRST AID MEASURES 

Description of First Aid Measures:  

Inhalation:  If adverse effects occur, remove to uncontaminated area.  If not breathing, give artificial respiration 
or oxygen by qualified personnel.  Seek immediate medical attention. 

Skin Contact:  Wash skin with soap and water for at least 15 minutes.  Thoroughly clean and dry contaminated 
clothing before reuse. 

Eye Contact:  Flush eyes with water for at least 15 minutes.  If necessary, seek medical attention. 

Ingestion:  If adverse effects occur after ingestion, seek medical treatment. 

Most Important Symptoms/Effects, Acute and Delayed:  May cause irritation, lung damage, silicosis, and cancer.  

Indication of any immediate medical attention and special treatment needed, if necessary:  If any of the above 
symptoms are present, seek medical attention if needed. 

5.  FIRE FIGHTING MEASURES 

Fire and Explosion Hazards:  Negligible fire hazard.  Avoid generating dust.  See Section 9, “Physical and Chemical 
Properties” for flammability properties. 

Extinguishing Media: 
 
 

Suitable:  Use extinguishing agents appropriate for surrounding fire. 
Unsuitable:  None listed. 

Specific Hazards Arising from the Chemical:  None listed. 

Special Protective Equipment and Precautions for Fire-Fighters:  Avoid inhalation of material or combustion 
byproducts.  Wear full protective clothing and NIOSH approved self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA). 

NFPA Ratings (0 = Minimal; 1 = Slight; 2 = Moderate; 3 = Serious; 4 = Severe)  
 

Reactivity = 0 

Health = 1 

Fire = 0 

6.  ACCIDENTAL RELEASE MEASURES 

Personal  Precautions,  Protective  Equipment  and  Emergency  Procedures:    Any  accumulated  material  on 
surfaces should be removed and properly disposed of.  Use suitable protective equipment; see Section 8, “Exposure 
Controls and Personal Protection”. 

Methods  and  Materials  for  Containment  and  Clean  up:   Collect  spilled  material  in  appropriate  container  for 
disposal.  Keep out of water supplies and sewers.  Keep unnecessary people away, isolate hazard area and deny entry. 

SRM 2960 

 

Page 2 of 6 

7.  HANDLING AND STORAGE 

Safe Handling Precautions:  Minimize dust generation.  See Section 8, “Exposure Controls and Personal Protection”. 

Storage:    Store  and  handle  in  accordance  with  all  current  regulations  and  standards.    Keep  separated  from 
incompatible substances (See Section 10, “Stability and Reactivity”). 

8.  EXPOSURE CONTROLS AND PERSONAL PROTECTION 

Exposure Limits: 

ACGIH  (TWA):  0.025 mg/m3 (respirable fraction) 

NIOSH  (TWA):  0.05 mg/m3 (respirable dust) 
 

(IDLH):  25 mg/m3 (respirable dust) 

OSHA  (TWA):  (1/2)[30/(% SiO2 + 2)] mg/m3 (total dust) 
 
 

(1/2)[250/(% SiO2 + 5)] mppcf (respirable fraction) 
(1/2)[10/(% SiO2 + 2)] mg/m3 (respirable fraction) 

 
 

Engineering Controls:   Provide  local  exhaust  or  process  enclosure  ventilation  system.  Ensure  compliance  with 
applicable exposure limits. 

Personal Protection:  In accordance with OSHA 29 CFR 1910.132, subpart I, wear appropriate Personal Protective 
Equipment (PPE) to minimize exposure to this material. 

Respiratory Protection:    If workplace conditions warrant a respirator, a respiratory protection program that 
meets  OSHA  29CFR  1910.134  must  be  followed.    Refer  to  NIOSH  42  CFR  84  for  applicable  certified 
respirators. 

Eye/Face Protection:  Wear splash resistant safety goggles with a face shield.  An eyewash station should be 
readily available near areas of use. 

Skin and Body Protection:  Personal protective equipment for the body should be selected based on the task 
being performed and the risks involved and should be approved by a specialist before handling this product.  
Chemical-resistant gloves should be worn at all times when handling chemicals. 

9.  PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES

 

Descriptive Properties: 

Appearance (physical state, color, etc.): 

Molecular Formula: 
Molar Mass (g/mol): 
Odor: 
Odor threshold: 
pH: 
Evaporation rate: 
Melting point/freezing point (ºC): 
Density (g/mL): 
Vapor Pressure (mmHg): 
Vapor Density (air = 1): 
Viscosity (cP): 
Solubility(ies): 

Partition coefficient (n-octanol/water): 
Particle Size: 

Cristobalite 
colorless to white, amorphous 
powder 
SiO2 
60.09 
odorless 
not available 
not applicable 
not applicable 
1710 (3110 ºF) 
2.32 as Specific gravity 
0 at 20 ºC 
not applicable 
not applicable 
insoluble in water;  
soluble in hydrofluoric acid 
and molten alkali 
not available 
respirable 

SRM 2960 

 

Page 3 of 6 

Thermal Stability Properties: 

Autoignition Temperature (ºC): 
Thermal Decomposition (ºC): 
Initial boiling point and boiling range (ºC): 
Explosive Limits, LEL (Volume %): 
Explosive Limits, UEL (Volume %): 
Flash Point (ºC): 
Flammability (solid, gas): 
 

10.  STABILITY AND REACTIVITY 

 
not applicable 
not available 
2230 (4046 ºF) 
not applicable 
not applicable 
not applicable 
not applicable 
 

Reactivity:  Stable at normal temperatures and pressure. 

Stability: 

X 

Stable 

 

Unstable 

Possible Hazardous Reactions:  None listed. 

Conditions to Avoid:  Avoid generating dust. 

Incompatible Materials:  Bases, acids, oxidizing materials, combustible materials. 

Fire/Explosion Information:  See Section 5, “Fire Fighting Measures”. 

Hazardous Decomposition:  Thermal decomposition will produce miscellaneous decomposition products. 

Hazardous Polymerization: 
 

11.  TOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION 

  Will Occur 

X  Will Not Occur 

Route of Exposure: 

X 

Inhalation 

 

Skin 

 

Ingestion 

Symptoms  Related  to  the  Physical,  Chemical  and  Toxicological  Characteristics:    May  cause  irritation,  lung 
damage, silicosis, and cancer. 

Potential Health Effects (Acute, Chronic and Delayed): 

Inhalation:    Acute  exposure  to  fine  particles  containing  respirable  cristobalite  may  result  in  discomfort  and 
irritation; chronic inhalation of very high concentrations of finely divided crystalline silica dust, exposure ranging 
from  a  few  weeks  to  4  to  5  years,  may  cause  a  rapidly  developing  silicosis  characterized  by  pulmonary 
insufficiency  with  severe  dyspnea,  violent  coughing,  tachypnea,  weight  loss,  and  cyanosis  leading  to  the 
development of cor pulmonale and death within a relatively short period of time.  A slow developing silicosis 
may  result  from  exposure  to  relatively  low  levels  of  dust.    Studies  have  shown  that  persons  diagnosed  with 
silicosis have an increased risk for developing lung cancer. 

Skin Contact:  May cause irritation due to mechanical abrasion. 

Eye Contact:  May cause irritation due to mechanical abrasion. 

Ingestion:  Effects of ingestion are due to mechanical action as crystalline silica is biologically inert. 

Numerical Measures of Toxicity: 

Acute Toxicity:  Not classified; no data available. 

Skin Corrosion/Irritation:  Not classified; no data available. 

Serious Eye Damage/ Eye Irritation:  Not classified; no data available. 

Respiratory Sensitization:  Not classified; no data available. 

Skin Sensitization:  Not classified; no data available. 

Germ Cell Mutagenicity:  Not classified; no data available. 

Carcinogenicity: Category 1 

Listed as a Carcinogen/Potential Carcinogen 
Silica dust, crystalline, in the form of quartz or cristobalite is listed by IARC, Group 1, carcinogenic to humans.  
Silica, crystalline is listed by NTP as a known human carcinogen (respirable size).  Cristobalite is not listed 
by OSHA as a designated carcinogen.   

X  Yes 

No 

SRM 2960 

 

Page 4 of 6 

Waste Disposal:  Dispose of waste in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations. 

Reproductive Toxicity:  Not classified. 

Specific Target Organ Toxicity (STOT), Single Exposure:  Not classified; no data available. 

Specific Target Organ Toxicity (STOT), Repeated Exposure:  Category 1 

Cumulative exposure may result in reduced lung capacity and silicosis. 

Aspiration Hazard:  Not classified. 

12.  ECOLOGICAL INFORMATION 

Ecotoxicity Data:  No data available. 
Persistence and Degradability:  No data available. 
Bioaccumulative Potential:  No data available. 
Mobility in Soil:  No data available. 
Other Adverse effects:  No data available. 

13.  DISPOSAL CONSIDERATIONS 

14.  TRANSPORTATION INFORMATION 

U.S. DOT and IATA:  Not regulated by DOT or IATA. 

15.  REGULATORY INFORMATION 

U.S. Regulations: 

CERCLA Sections 102a/103 (40 CFR 302.4):  Not regulated. 

SARA Title III Section 302 (40 CFR 355.30):  Not regulated. 

SARA Title III Section 304 (40 CFR 355.40):  Not regulated. 

SARA Title III Section 313 (40 CFR 372.65):  Not regulated. 

OSHA Process Safety (29 CFR 1910.119):  Not regulated. 

SARA Title III Sections 311/312 Hazardous Categories (40 CFR 370.21): 

ACUTE HEALTH: 
CHRONIC HEALTH: 
FIRE: 
REACTIVE: 
PRESSURE: 

No. 
Yes. 
No. 
No. 
No. 

State Regulations: 

U.S. TSCA Inventory: Cristobalite is listed. 

TSCA 12(b), Export Notification:  Not listed. 

Canadian Regulations: 

WHMIS Information:  Not provided for this material. 

 

 

California Proposition 65:  WARNING!  This product contains a chemical [silica, crystalline (airborne particles 
of respirable size)] known to the state of California to cause cancer. 

SRM 2960 

 

Page 5 of 6 

16.  OTHER INFORMATION 

Issue Date:  22 May 2015 

Sources: 

ChemAdvisor, Inc., SDS Cristobalite, 20 March 2015. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key of Acronyms: 

 

ACGIH 

ALI 
CAS  
CEN 
CERCLA  

NIST 

NRC 
NTP  
OSHA  
PEL  

RCRA  
REL  
RM 
RQ  
RTECS 

National Institute of Standards and Technology 

Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
National Toxicology Program 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration  
Permissible Exposure Limit 

American Conference of Governmental Industrial 
Hygienists 
Annual Limit on Intake 
Chemical Abstracts Service  
European Committee for Standardization 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act  
Code of Federal Regulations  
Coal Mine Dust Personal Sample Unit 
Department of Transportation  
Effective Concentration, 50 % 
European Inventory of Existing Commercial Chemical 
Substances  
Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know 
Act  
SCBA  
International Agency for Research on Cancer  
SRM  
International Air Transportation Agency  
STEL 
Immediately Dangerous to Life and Health  
STOT 
International Organization for Standardization 
TDLo 
Lethal Concentration, 50 %  
TLV  
Lethal Dose, 50 % 
TPQ  
Lower Explosive Limit  
TSCA  
Material Safety Data Sheet  
TWA  
National Fire Protection Association  
Mine Safety and Health Administration 
UEL  
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health   WHMIS  Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System 

Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus  
Standard Reference Material  
Short Term Exposure Limit  
Specific Target Organ Toxicity  
Toxic Dose Low 
Threshold Limit Value  
Threshold Planning Quantity  
Toxic Substances Control Act  
Time Weighted Average  
Upper Explosive Limit  

Resource Conservation and Recovery Act  
Recommended Exposure Limit  
Reference Material 
Reportable Quantity  
Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances 

Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act  

SARA  

CFR  
CPSU 
DOT  
EC50 
EINECS 

EPCRA  

IARC  
IATA  
IDLH  
ISO 
LC50 
LD50 
LEL  
MSDS  
NFPA  
MSHA 
NIOSH  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:   Physical  and  chemical  data  contained  in  this  SDS  are  provided  only  for  use  in  assessing  the 
hazardous nature of the material.  The SDS was prepared carefully, using current references; however, NIST does not 
certify the data in the SDS.    The certified values for this material are given in the NIST Certificate of Analysis. 

Users of this SRM should ensure that the SDS in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished by contacting 
the SRM Program: telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srmmsds@nist.gov; or via the Internet at 
http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 2960 

 

Page 6 of 6 

