 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE:  10 August 2016 
 
Product Identifier 

SRM Number:  3278 
SRM Name: 

Tocopherols in Edible Oils 

Under the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 29 CFR 1910.1200, 
this  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  NOT  classified  as  a  physical  hazard  or  a  health  hazard,  a  simple 
asphyxiant, combustible dust, pyrophoric gas, or hazard not otherwise classified. There are no hazard pictograms, 
hazard statements or signal word associated with it.  Safety Data Sheet information is not required.  This document 
may be used in conjunction with your hazard communication program. 
 
Description:    This  SRM  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  validating  analytical  methods  for  the  determination  of 
tocopherols in edible oils and similar matrices.  This SRM can also be used for quality assurance when assigning 
values  to  in-house  control  materials.    A  unit  of  SRM 3278  consists  of  five  ampoules  of  oil  each  containing 
approximately 1 mL of material under argon. 
 
Additional  Notes:    For  research  use.    Not  for  human  consumption.    For  storage  and  use  information,  see  the 
Certificate of Analysis. 
 
Disposal:  SRM 3278 components should be disposed of in accordance with local, state, and federal regulations. 
 
Transport  Information:    This  material  is  not  regulated  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Transportation (DOT)  and/or 
International Air Transport Association (IATA). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:  This document was prepared carefully, using current references.  Users of this SRM should ensure that 
this  document  and  the  corresponding  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  are  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program:    telephone  (301)  975-2200;  fax  (301)  948-3730;  e-mail 
srmmsds@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 3278 

 

Page 1 of 1 

