 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE:  01 May 2015 
 
Product Identifier 

RM Number:    8091 
RM Name:   

Scanning Electron Microscope Sharpness Standard 

Under the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 29 CFR 1910.1200, 
this  Reference  Material  (RM)  is  NOT  classified  as  a  physical  hazard  or  a  health  hazard,  a  simple  asphyxiant, 
combustible  dust,  pyrophoric  gas,  or  hazard  not  otherwise  classified.    There  are  no  hazard  pictograms,  hazard 
statements or signal word associated with it.  Safety Data Sheet information is not required.  This document may be 
used in conjunction with your hazard communication program. 
 
Exemption:    1910.1200  (c).    This  RM  is  an  Article,  as  the  word  is  defined  by  OSHA,  where  Article  means  a 
manufactured  item  other  than  a  fluid  or  particle:  (i)  which  is  formed  to  a  specific  shape  or  design  during 
manufacture; (ii) which has end use function(s) dependent in whole or in part upon its shape or design during end 
use; and (iii) which under normal conditions of use does not release more than very small quantities, e.g., minute or 
trace  amounts  of  a  hazardous  chemical  (as  determined  under  paragraph  (d)  of  1910.1200),  and  does  not  pose  a 
physical hazard or health risk to employees.  
 

Description:  This RM is intended primarily for use in checking the sharpness performance of scanning electron 
microscopes.  It is supplied as a small (2 mm × 2 mm) diced semiconductor chip. 
 
Disposal:  RM 8091 should be disposed of in accordance with local, state, and federal regulations. 
 
Transport  Information:    This  material  is  not  regulated  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Transportation  (DOT)  and/or 
International Air Transportation Association (IATA). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:  This document was prepared carefully, using current references.  Users of this SRM should ensure that 
this  document  and  the  corresponding  Report  of  Investigation  in  their  possession  are  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program:    telephone  (301)  975-2200;  fax  (301)  948-3730;  e-mail 
srmmsds@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

RM 8091 

 

Page 1 of 1 

