RM Number: 8507 (Renewals) 
MSDS Number: 8507 
RM Name: Moisture in Transformer Oil 
Issued: March, 1992 

MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEET 
 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Standard Reference Materials Program 
Gaithersburg, Maryland  20899 
(301) 975-2019  

 
SECTION I. MATERIAL IDENTIFICATION   

 
Material Name:  Moisture in Transformer Oil 
 
Description/ Other Designations:  Moisture in Petroleum Lubricating Oil (*CORAY 22) 
 
Chemical Formula:  A mixture of hydrotreated light and heavy naphthenic distillate with petroleum. 
 
CAS Reg. Nos.: 

**64742-53-6 
**64742-52-5 

 
DOT Classification:  Not hazardous by DOT regulations. 
 
Manufacturer/ Supplier:  Available from a number of suppliers. 
 
 
 

 
SECTION II. HAZARDOUS INGREDIENTS 

 

 
Hazardous Component 
 
Transformer Oil 
 

 
Nominal Concentration 
 
 
 

~ 100 

 
Limits and Toxicity Data 
 
ACGIH TLV-TWA 
  5mg/m3 for oil mist in air 

 
 
 

 

Rat, Oral: 
  LD50:  greater than 5 g/kg body weight 

Rabbit, Acute Dermal: 
  LD50:  greater than 3.16 g/kg body weight

*Exxon Trade Name 
**CAS numbers for components 
 

1 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
SECTION III. PHYSICAL/ CHEMICAL CHARACTERISTICS  

 
Transformer Oil 
 
Appearance and Odor:  A clear liquid with a mild, bland petroleum odor. 
Molecular Weight:  ca 310 
Specific Gravity (15.8 °C/15.8 °C):  0.90 
Boiling Point:  ca 241 °C    (by ASTM D 2887) 
Pour, (Congealing or Melting Point):  -18 °C 
Viscosity (at 40 °C):  20 cSt 
Vapor Pressure (at 20 °C):  Less than 0.01 mmHg 
Vapor Density (Air=1):  Greater than 5. 
Evaporation Rate (n-Butyl Acetate=1):  Less than 0.01 
pH:  Essentially neutral. 
Solubility in Water (vol/vol at 0 °C):  Negligible. 
 

 
SECTION IV. FIRE AND EXPLOSION HAZARD DATA  

 
Flash Point:   157 °C 
 
(Method Used):    ASTM D 92  (Cleveland Open Cup) 
 
Autoignition Temperature:    Greater than 204 °C    
 
(Method Used):    ASTM E 659 
 
Flammability Limits in Air (Volume %):  UPPER:  7 

LOWER: 0.9  

 

Extinguishing Media:  Use foam, dry chemical or carbon dioxide.  Plan fire protection and response strategy through 
consultation with local fire protection authorities or appropriate specialties. 
 
Special Fire Procedures:  Fire-fighters should wear self-contained breathing apparatus and full protective clothing when 
fighting fires involving this material. 
 
Unusual Fire and Explosion Hazards:  No unusual fire or explosion hazards are associated with this product. 
 

 
SECTION V. REACTIVITY DATA 

 
Stability:           X       Stable                       Unstable 
 
Conditions to Avoid:  Avoid excessive temperatures and conditions which promote oxidation. 
 
Incompatibility (Materials to Avoid):  Keep this material from strong oxidizing agents. 
 
Hazardous Decomposition or Byproducts:  Fumes, smoke, carbon monoxide, sulfur oxides and aldehydes along with other 
decomposition products can be produced in incomplete combustion. 
 
Hazardous Polymerization:      ______   Will Occur                 X        Will Not Occur 

 

2 

 

 
SECTION VI. HEALTH HAZARD DATA  

 
Route of Entry:          X        Inhalation                     X        Skin                   X        Ingestion 
 
Health Hazards (Acute and Chronic):  The vapor pressure of this material is very low therefore, vapor inhalation under 
ambient conditions is normally not a problem.  However, health studies have shown that many petroleum hydrocarbons and 
synthetic lubricants pose potential human health risks which may vary from person to person.  As a precaution, exposure to 
liquids, vapors, mists or fumes should be minimized.   
 
Prolonged or repeated skin contact with this product may remove skin oils possibly leading to irritation and dermatitis; 
contact with the eyes may cause eye irritation.  This product has a low order of oral toxicity, but minute amounts aspirated 
into the lungs during ingestion or vomiting may cause mild to severe pulmonary injury and possibly death. 
 
 
Signs and Symptoms of Exposure:  Headache, nausea, vomiting, eye and/or skin irritation are symptoms of over exposure. 
 
Medical Conditions Generally Aggravated by Exposure:  N/A 
 
 
Listed as a Carcinogen/Potential Carcinogen: 

In the National Toxicology Program (NTP) Report on Carcinogens  
In the International Agency for Research (IARC) Monographs        
By the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)   

Yes 
____ 
____ 
____ 

No 
_X_ 
_X_ 
_X_ 

 
 
 
 
EMERGENCY AND FIRST AID PROCEDURES: 
 

Skin Contact:  Remove contaminated shoes and clothing.  Rinse affected area with large amounts of  water followed by 
washing the area with soap and water.  Contact medical assistance if necessary. 
 
Eye Contact:  Immediately flush eyes, including under the eyelids, with copious amounts of water for at least 15 
minutes.  Contact medical assistance if necessary. 
 
Inhalation:   If inhaled, remove the victim to fresh air.  If breathing is difficult, give oxygen; if victim is not breathing, 
give artificial respiration.  Contact medical assistance if necessary.   
 
Ingestion:  If ingested, wash out mouth with water.  DO NOT induce vomiting.  Contact medical assistance if necessary. 
  
 
 

TARGET ORGAN(S) OF ATTACK:  Skin and upper respiratory tract. 

 
 
 

 

3 

 

 

 
SECTION VII. PRECAUTIONS FOR SAFE HANDLING AND USE 

 
Steps to be taken in Case Material is Released or Spilled:  Notify safety personnel of major spills and/or leaks.  Remove 
sources of ignition.  Ventilate area and recover free product with sand, earth or other suitable absorbent.  Keep product out of 
sewers and watercourses by diking or impounding.   
 
 
Waste Disposal:  Follow all Federal, state and local regulations. 
 

Note:  Empty containers retain residue (liquid and/or vapor) and can be dangerous.  DO NOT 
pressurize, cut, weld, braze, solder, drill, grind or expose such containers to heat, flame, sparks, 
static electricity or other sources of ignition.  DO NOT attempt to clean and re-use containers.  
Containers should be completely drained and disposed of in a environmentally safe manner.   

 
 
Handling and Storage:  Provide adequate ventilation where operating conditions may create excessive vapors and mists.  
Use explosion-proff  equipment.  Provide approved respiratory apparatus for nonroutine or emergency use.  Use an approved 
filter and vapor respirator when vapor/mist concentrations are high.  Wear protective rubber gloves and chemical safety 
glasses when contact with liquid or high mist concentrations may occur.  Additional protective clothing may be required 
depending on working conditions.  An eye wash station and washing facilities are to be readily available.  Avoid prolonged 
skin contact and breathing of vapors and mists.  Follow good hygiene practice; wash exposed skin areas several times a day 
with soap and water.  Launder soiled clothes before reuse.   
 

Note:    Contact  lenses  pose  a  special  problem;  soft  lenses  may  absorb  irritants  and  all  lenses 
concentrate them.  DO NOT wear contact lenses in the lab. 

Store material in a cool, dry, well ventilated area away from sources of open flame, heat, strong oxidizing agents and sources 
of ignition.  Protect containers from physical damage.  Use non-sparking tools and explosion proof electrical equipment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

4 

 
SECTION VIII. SOURCE DATA/ OTHER COMMENTS 

 
Sources:   Exxon Company USA, MSDS CORAY 22, June 1, 1989. 

Hawley's Condensed Chemical Dictionary, 11th ed., 1987. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Carmelita S. Davis   (301) 975-6439 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Standard Reference Materials Program 
Gaithersburg, Maryland  20899 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:  Physical and chemical data contained in this MSDS are provided for use in assessing the hazardous nature of the 
material.  The MSDS was prepared carefully, using current references, however NIST does not certify the data on the MSDS. 
The certified values for this material are given only on the NIST Certificate of Analysis. 

 

5 

