 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE:  09 July 2013 
 
Product Identifier 

SRM Number:  927d 
SRM Name: 

Bovine Serum Albumin (7 % Solution) 

Under the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 29 CFR 1910.1200, 
this  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  NOT  classified  as  a  physical  hazard  or  a  health  hazard,  a  simple 
asphyxiant, combustible dust, pyrophoric gas, or hazard not otherwise classified.  There are no hazard pictograms, 
hazard statements or signal word associated with it.  Safety Data Sheet information is not required.  This document 
may be used in conjunction with your hazard communication program. 
 
Exemption:    1910.1200(b)(6)(xii).    This  SRM  is  a  biological  material  and  should  be  considered  a  potential 
biological hazard. 
 
Description:    This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  the  standardization  of 
procedures employed in clinical analyses for total serum protein, for critical evaluation of daily working standards 
used in these procedures, and as a reference standard for assays of total protein by colorimetric methods.  This SRM 
is a solution (mass fraction 7 %) of known protein concentration and purity.  A unit of 927d consists of 10 ampoules, 
each containing 2.2 mL of solution. 
 
Additional Notes for Biomaterials:  SRM 927d IS INTENDED FOR IN-VITRO DIAGNOSTIC USE ONLY.  The 
blood  used  in  the  preparation  of  SRM 927d  Bovine  Serum  Albumin  (7 %  Solution)  was  collected  from  cattle 
sourced in the United States.  Only blood from cattle/carcasses that have passed ante-mortem and post-mortem U.S. 
Department of Agriculture (USDA) Food Safety Inspection Service (FSIS) inspection was used.  This material was 
collected prior to any known case of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE) in the United States.  There were no 
additives  to  the  pooled  serum  prior  to  protein  purification.    See  Certificate  of  Analysis  for  storage  and  use 
instructions. 
 
Disposal:  SRM 927d components and derived solutions should be disposed of in accordance with local, state, and 
federal regulations. 
 
Transport  Information:    This  material  is  not  regulated  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Transportation  (DOT)  and/or 
International Air Transportation Association (IATA). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:    This document  was prepared carefully,  using current references.  Users of this SRM  should ensure 
that  this  document  and  the  corresponding  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  are  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program:    telephone  (301)  975-2200;  fax  (301)  948-3730;  e-mail 
srmmsds@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

SRM 927d 

 

Page 1 of 1 

