LEN 
By   National Institute of Standards & 

Technology 
 

Certificate  

 
Standard Reference Material 1010a 
 
Microcopy Resolution Test Charts 
 
(ISO Test Chart No. 2) 

be used to determine the resolving power of microcopy 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended to 
systems in the photographic industry.  It was designed to meet the general requirements for ISO Test Chart No. 2, as 
described in ISO 3334: 1989 [1].  This SRM consists of five identical charts with 26 patterns printed on white 
photographic paper with a glossy surface.  Each chart is nominally 90 mm wide by 113 mm high.   
 
Test Chart Pattern Description:   The patterns consist of black bars on a white background, the length of the bars 
are 24 times their width, and the bars and spaces are of equa l width.  The patterns range in spatial frequency from    
1 cycle/mm to 18 cycles/mm.  Each pattern is made up of two groups of five parallel bars; the bars in the two groups 
are oriented perpendicular to one anot her.  The number associated with each  pattern is the number of cycles/mm on 
that pattern. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of this SRM is deemed to be indefinite within the stated tolerances, 
provided the SRM is stored and handled in accordance with the instructions given in this certificate.   
 
NIST Measurement Technique:  All SRM 1010a test charts were made from one master negative.  Originally, 
25 % of the test charts in the lot were individually ev aluated for horizontal and vertical observation measurement 
by a measuring microscope and reflectance densitometer.   In 1998, measurements were made on five randomly 
chosen SRM units from remaining stoc
width, and relative density were 
remeasured using a custom air bearing supported X-Y coordinate machine, using a ultra-high precision 
microscope and laser interferometer pos itioning stage.  X-Y coordinate accuracy  of the system was greater than 
40 nm.  Measurements were also check ed using a standard measuring micros cope and using the X-Y coordinate 
machine in manual mode with a calibrated graticle. 
 
Measurement Results Relative to  ISO 3334: 1989 Specifications:   Relative density exceeded the specified 85 % 
lower limit for all patterns.  Spatial frequency error of four full cycles was less than the 3 % specified for all 
patterns.  Line length was within the specified range for  all patterns.  The spatial frequencies 1.0 through 5.0 and 10 
through 18, are within the speci fied tolerance.  For spatial frequencies 5. 6 through 9.0, the tolerances are exceeded 
by a maximum of 0.03, see Table 1. 
 
The technical and support aspects involved in the issuance of this SRM and the revision of this certificate were 
coordinated through the Standard Reference Materials Program by R.J. Gettings. 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899  
Certificate Issue Date: 6 October 1998* 
12 Jun 78 (original certificate date); 21 Jun 82 (editorial); 1 Jun 90 (editorial)  
*This revision reports increased accuracy.  This certificate replaces all previous SRM 1010a certificates. 

Thomas E. Gills, Chief 
Standard Reference Materials Program 

k.  Line width, line length, space 

SRM 1010a 

Page 1 of 3 

Original optical examinations and m easurements leading to certification were made by L.E. Fink of the NIST 
Radiometric Physics Division.  Current  measurements leading to the analys is of measurement uncertainty where 
performed by J. B. Fowler of the NIST Optical Technology Division (formerly, Radiometric Physics Division). 
 
Storage and Handling:   To extend lifetime, test charts must be stored away from ultraviolet light, excessive 
temperature, and humidity.  After use, return the chart to the bag provided or to one that provides similar or better 
protection. 
 
Instructions for Use:  The useful reduction ratio of a microcopying camera is limited by the nature of the material 
solving power of the photogra phic material, accuracy of 
to be copied, the resolving power of the lens, the re
focusing, vibration, and systematic relative motion of the optical image with respect to the photographic material.  
The resolving power of a system in cycles/mm is the number of the pattern resolved in an image multiplied by the 
inverse of the reduction ratio. 
 
To measure the resolving power of the microcopying system, photograph the charts in the same manner as 
field of view.  The corner charts 
documents.  The charts are placed at th e center and the corners of the camera 
should be oriented so that one group of  bars is directed toward the center of 
the field.  Additional charts may be 
placed at the center of the long side or  anywhere in the field at the user’s di scretion.  Examine the processed film 
images with a microscope using a magnification from 1/3 to 1 times the number of cycles/mm of the resolving 
power to be observed.  For example, to view an image from a system with resolving power of 100 cycles/mm, the 
magnification should be between 30 X and 100 X. 
 
If the camera is slightly out of focus, the copy of the chart may have more or less than five bars in some groups.  
This is “spurious resolution” and is sometimes accompanie d by failure to resolve at one spatial frequency when 
apparent resolution occurs at a higher frequency.  If there 
is no evidence of spurious resolution, find the smallest 
pattern in which the bars can be counted with reasonable assu rance.  For example, if the finest resolved pattern is 
marked “4.0” and the reduction ratio is 1:29, the resolving power is 116 cycles/mm. 
 
Away from the center of the field, the resolution of bars directed toward the center is often not equal to the 
resolution perpendicular to that direction because of lens aberrations.  If th e patterns perpendicular to one another 
are not equally resolved at the center of the field, one should suspect camera vibration or other image motion with 
respect to the film. 
 
The resolution required to copy type depends on the size of type, the  reduction ratio, and the quality of reproduction 
required.  For most practical purposes, R, the resolving power in cycles/mm; e, the height in millimeters of the 
lower case “e” in the type to  be copied; r, the inverse of the reduction ratio; and q, an arbitrary “quality index” are 
related by the following equation: 
 

 
For excellent copy, in which the details of type are clearly  defined, q must be eight or more.  If q is assigned a value 
of five, the copy may be read without difficulty although serifs  and fine details of type are not clear.  If q is three, 
the copy may be difficult to read with the letters e, c, and o being partly closed. 
 
As a general “rule of thumb,” the resolving power of a lens-film combination R is related to the resolving power of 
lens r1 and the resolving power of the film r2 by the following equation: 
 

R

=

qr
e

.  

1
R

=

+

.  

1
r
1

1
r
2

 
The resolving power of a lens is limited by the wave nature of light.  The maximum resolving power of the lens 
depends on the wavelength of light, the form of the pa

tterns observed, and the condition of observation.  The 

SRM 1010a 

Page 2 of 3 

maximum axial resolving power, A (expressed in cycles/mm),  of a lens at various wavelengths can be obtained by 

1 0 0 0 0 0 0

1 2 2.

b

λ

using Rayleigh's criterion [2],  A

=

, where b is the f-number and λ is the wavelength in nm. 

 
For example, if the wavelength of the system’s illuminati on is 546 nm and the f-number of the lens being used is 
4.0, the maximum axial resolving power of the lens would be 375 cycles/mm.  As suggested by this relationship, 
most lenses have their highest resolving power at full aper ture, but the image contrast is generally more satisfactory 
if the aperture is closed one or two steps from full aperture. 
 
Minor excursions from the ISO 3334: 1989 requirement were 
detected when using the X-Y coordinate machine.  
These are listed below, but are so sm all that they are undetectable when  using the SRM in accordance with ISO 
3334:1989. 
 

Table 1.  Excursions from ISO 3334: 1989 Tolerance 

ISO 3334: 1989 Tolerance 

NIST Measurement 

 

 

Spatial Frequency 
 0.95-1.05 
 0.95-1.05 
 0.95-1.05 
 0.95-1.05 
 0.95-1.05 

 5.6 
 6.3 
 7.1 
 8.0 
 9.0 

  1.055 
  1.058 
  1.042 
  1.076 
  1.08 

REFERENCES 

ISO 3334:1989 Micrographics - ISO Resolution Test Chart No. 2 - Description and Use. 

 
[1] 
[2]  Smith, W. J., Modern Optical Engineering - Design of Optical Systems, McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1966. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users of this SRM should ensure that the certificate in 
their possession is current. Th is can be accomplished by 
contacting the SRM Program at:   Telephone (301) 975-6776 (select “Certific ates”), Fax (301) 926-4751, e-mail 
srminfo@nist.gov, or via the Internet http://ts.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 1010a 

Page 3 of 3 

