Ss.  Depart  i  ritvof  Commerce 

    

alcol 

ldrige 

  

National  Burean  of  Standards 

Certificate  of  Analysis 

Standard  Reference  Material  1225 

Low-Alloy  Steel,  AIS!  4130 

(In  cooperation  with  the  American  Society  for  Testing  and  Materials) 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  is  in  the  form  of  disks  approximately  32  mm  (1  1/4in)  in  diameter  and  19  mm  (3/4  in) 
thick,  intended  for  use  in  optical  emission  and  x-ray  spectrometric  methods  of  analysis. 

  

Certified’ 
%  by  wt. 

Estimated 
Uncertainty” 

Element 

Carbon 

Manganese 

Phosphorus 

Sulfur 

Silicon 

Nickel 

Chromium 

Vanadium 

Molybdenum 
. 
! 

. 

0.002 

.O1 

-001 

.001 

.002 

.003 

01 

001 

.004 

. 

. 

The  certified  value  listed  for  an  element  is  the  present  best  estimate  of  the  “true”  value 
based  on  the  results  of  the  cooperative  program  for  certification. 
’  The  estimated  uncertainty  listed  for  an  element  is  based  on  judgment  and  represents  an 
evaluation  of  the  combined  effects  of  method  imprecision,  possible  systematic  errors 
among  methods,  and  material  variability.  (No  attempt  was  made  to  derive  exact  statistical 
measures  of  imprecision  because  several  methods  were  involved  in  the  determination  of 
most  constituents.) 

The  overall  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  certification  was  performed  under  the  direction  of 
J.I.  Shultz,  Research  Associate,  ASTM-NBS  Research  Associate  Program. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  Standard  Reference 
Material  were  coordinated  through  the  Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials  by  R.E.  Michaelis  and  W.P.  Reed. 

ean g. 

g 

aaae 

Washington,  D.C.  20234 
March  16,  1983 

George  A.  Uriano,  Chief 
Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials 

0.274 

.48 

-007 

.014 

221 

O18 

91 

.004 

.  166 

(over)

PLANNING,  PREPARATION,  TESTING,  ANALYSIS: 

The  material  for  this  standard  was  provided  by  the  Bethlehem  Steel  Corp.,  Lackawanna,  N.Y.  Billets  were  fabricated 
at  the  Puget  Sound  Naval  Shipyard,  Bremerton,  Washington,  where  they  were  forged  to  slabs  and  portions  of 
questionable  homogeneity  were  cut  and  discarded.  The  remaining  slab  sections  were  forged  and  swaged  to  rods  (oversize 
32  mm  in  diameter).  The  rods  were  given  a  sub-critical  anneal,  and  were  then  centerless  ground  to  the  final  size  of 
32  mm  in  diameter. 

Extensive  homogeneity  testing  was  performed  in  the  Inorganic  Analytical  Research  Division  at  NBS  by  optical  emission 
spectrometry,  J.A.  Norris;  by  x-ray  fluorescence,  P.A.  Pella;  and  carbon/sulfur  analysis  by  B.I.  Diamondstone.  The 
material  variability  was  within  the  methods  imprecision. 

Cooperative  analyses  for  certification  were  performed  in  the  following  laboratories: 

Climax  Molybdenum  Company  of  Michigan,  Ann  Arbor,  Michigan,  R.C.  Binns. 

Lukens  Steel  Company,  Coatesville,  Pa.,  J.H.  Morris. 

National  Bureau  of  Standards,  Inorganic  Analytical  Research  Division,  B.I.  Diamondstone  and  R.K.  Bell,  ASTM-NBS 

Assistant  Research  Associate. 

Pittsburgh  Testing  Laboratory,  Chicago,  Illinois,  D.D.  Troutman. 

Pittsburgh  Testing  Laboratory,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.,  W.S.  Carlson.

