National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material 1577c 

 

 

Bovine Liver 

ined results from two or more 

  However, the values do not meet the NIST 

additional  elements are provided in Table  4.  An 

 
Standard Reference  Material (SRM) 1577c consists of   liver  tissue derived from healthy steers .  The material was 
collected  and prepared under strict protocols designed to preserve the original compositi
on,  and to minimize 
contamination.  SRM 1577c is primarily intended for use in evaluating the accuracy of analytical methods for selected 
elements and 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 in animal tissues and other biological materials.  A unit of the SRM consists of 
one bottle containing 20 g of freeze-dried liver powder. 
 
Certified Mass Fraction  Values:  Certified mass fraction  values for elements are provided in  Table 1.  A certified 
mass fraction value for 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 is provided in Table 2.  The certified values for elements are based on 
results from either a primary analytical technique carried out at NIST, or the comb
chemically independent analytical techniques obtained at NIST and collaborating expert laboratories [1].  The certified 
value for 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 is based on the combined results from NIST and collaborating expert laboratories.  A 
NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy in that all known or suspected 
sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [1]. 
 
Reference Values:  Reference mass fraction values for additional elements are provided in Table 3.  Reference values 
are non-certified values that are the best estimates of the true values. 
criteria for certification and are provided with associated uncertainties that m ay reflect only measurement precision, 
tatistical agreement among m ultiple 
may not include all sources of uncertainty, or may reflect a lack of sufficient s
analytical methods [1]. 
 
Information Values:    Information  mass fraction values for 
information value is considered to be a value that will be of interest and use to the SRM user, but for which insufficient 
information is available to assess adequately the uncertainty assoc iated with the value, or is a value derived from a 
limited number of analyses [1].  Information values cannot be used to establish metrological traceability. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 1577c is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until  01 October 2028,  provided the SRM is handled and stored 
certificate (see “Instructions for  Handling, Storage, and Use”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If subst antive 
technical changes occur that affect the certification before the e
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination of the investigations and technical measurements leading to the c ertification of elements was under the 
leadership of R . Zeisler, formerly of NIST.   Coordination of the technica l measurements leading to the certification 
of 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 was performed by M.M. Phillips of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division  and J. Roseland 
and K. Patterson of the US Department of Agriculture (USDA, Beltsville, MD). 
 
Consultation on the statistical design of the experimental work and evaluation of the data was provided by S.D. Leigh, 
formerly of NIST, and J.H. Yen of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Support aspects involved in the preparation of this SRM were coordinated through the N IST  Office of Reference 
f  Reference 
Materials. 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  09 October 2018 
09 
me
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

in accordance with the instructions given in this 

xpiration of this certificate, NIST will notify the 

 

Page 1 of 6 

  

SRM 1577c  

Tc 

RESEARCH 

 Riley of the Rosenthal Meat Science and 

Collection and preparation of  SRM 1577c were performed by M.P . Cronise and C.N . Fales of the NIST  Office of 
Reference Materials   and E.A. Mackey, R.O. Spatz, and R . Zeisler of the NIST Chemi cal Sciences   Division.  The 
bovine liver material was collected at Texas A&M University (College Station, TX) with the assistance of W.D. James 
of the Center for Chemical Characterization and Analysis and R.R.
Technology Center. 
 
Technical measurements were performed by 
C.Q. Burdette,  S.J. Christopher, R.R . Greenberg, S.E . Long, 
E.A. Mackey, K.E. Murphy, B.J. Porter, S.A. Rabb, R.O. Spatz, B.E. Tomlin, L.J. Wood, L.L. Yu, and R.  Zeisler of 
the NIST  Chemical Sciences  Division.   The f ollowing collaborating laboratories and analysts   contributed to value 
assignment for elements:  C. Xiao, B. Ni, and W. Tian of China Institute of Atomic  Energy (Beijing, China); J. Che 
and L.-W. Hu of Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Nuclear Reactor Laboratory (Cambridge, MA); J. Kučera of 
Nuclear Physics Institute  ASCR (Řež, Czech Republic); W.D. James of Department of Chemistry and R.J. Taylor of 
the College of Veterinary Medicine at Texas A&M University (College Station, TX); C.S. Nomura and P.V. Oliveira 
Chemistry (São Paulo , Brazil); and  J. Harnly  and  E. Greene  of  USDA 
of  University of São Paulo, Institute of 
Beltsville Agricultural Research Center, Human Nutrition Research 
Center (Beltsville, MD).   The following 
collaborating laboratories participated in a USDA interlaboratory comparsion and contributed to value assignment for 
25-hydroxyvitamin D3 [2]:   Covance Laboratories, Inc . (Madison, WI); Health Canada  (Longueuil, QC, Canada); 
Heartland Laboratories (Ames, IA); Technical University of Denmark (Kongens Lyngby, Denmark). 
 
Support for assignment of the value for 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 was provided by National Institutes of Health, Office 
of Dietary Supplements (NIH-ODS).  Technical consultation was provided by J.M. Betz (NIH-ODS). 
 
NOTICE TO USERS:  SRM 1577c IS INTENDED FOR RESEARCH USE; NOT FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
Handling:   This material was derived from healthy steers.  These  animals were inspected by a Veterinary Medical 
Officer and did not show signs of infectious, contagious, and/or communicable dis
ease.  Normal caution and care 
should be exercised during handling and use of the material.  Users should be aware of sources of contamination.  To 
avoid contamination a Class 100 clean-air environment is recommended. 
 
Storage:  The material should be stored in its original container at room temperature  (10 °C to 30 °C).  SRM 1577c 
should not be exposed to intense sources of radiation, including ultraviolet light from lamps or sunlight. 
 
Use:  Prior to removal of test portions for analysis, the contents of the bottle should be mixed.  For elemental analysis, 
For  determination  of 
the recommended  minimum sample  size is 100  mg; see “Homogeneity Assessment” below.   For determination of 
25-hydroxyvitamin D3, the recommended minimum sample size is 2 g.  The mass fractions of elements in SRM 1577c 
are reported on a dry-mass basis.  Desiccator drying over CaSO4 (e.g., Drierite) to stable mass (approximately 10 days) 
is recommended prior to elemental analysis. 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
Sample Collection and Preparation:   The liver tissue was collected and processed under observation of principles 
for “true and representative” sampling as documented in the protocols for human and mari ne mammal tissues of the 
National Biomonitoring Specimen  Bank [3].  The liver tissue was harvested from  31 steers that were slaughtered at 
Texas A&M University College of Veterinary Medicine.  The supplier of this material has reported that this material 
ls.   The animals were 
was produced under sanitary conditions and was derived from clinically healthy anima
 meat from these animals was 
slaughtered for the purpose of teaching bovine anatomy and how to butcher.  The
prepared for retail under the supervision of a State of Texas meat inspector to ascertain the health of the animals.  The 
livers were excised whole, placed on a clean Teflon sheet,
 and inspected.  Each liver was rinsed with HPLC -grade 
water to remove excess blood, bile, and any other extraneous material.   The outer membrane and major blood vessels 
ons of approximately  10 cm3; 120 kg of 
were removed with titanium blade knives, and the tissue was cut into porti
fresh tissue was obtained from this process, frozen in clean Tefl on bags, and  then shipped to NIST.  The tissue was 
thawed and homogenized at NIST with a food processor equipped with titanium blades.  
The resulting paste was 
poured into glass trays, frozen, and lyophilized.   The dry material was blended again in the food processor  before 
being jet-milled.  The resulting fine powder was radiation sterilized and bottled.  
 

10 

 

(1)Certain commercial equipment, instruments or materials

identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
SRM 1577c  
Page 2 of 6 

 are  identified in this certificate to adequately specify the 

 

_  Spectrometry 

analysis (RNAA), prompt gamma activation 

Homogeneity Assessment:  The homogeneity of elements in SRM 1577c was assessed by analyzing test portions of 
approximately  100 mg with high -precision instrumental neutron activation  analysis (INAA).   Twelve bottles were  
randomly selected from the lot and  two 100 mg test portions were ta ken for INAA from different locations in each 
bottle.  The results for all elements reported by INAA (see  Tables 1 and 3) did not reveal any significant components 
of uncertainty due to heterogeneity ;  therefore the recommended minimum sample size   for elemental analysis   is 
100 mg.  The values and uncertainties reported in this Certificate for elements are valid for a 100 mg minimum sample 
size.  Analysis of smaller amounts may be subject to additional uncertainty due to heterogeneity. 
 
ithe
Analyses with solid-sampling graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometry (SS-GFASS) using test portions in the 
range of  20 µg to  70 µg showed homogeneity for distribution of Cd, Cu, Pb, and Zn within the uncertaint
y of  the 
method.  For 1 mg test portions, an uncertainty component from heterogeneity of  1 % to 2 % relative uncertainty was 
estimated from the experimental data for these elements. 
 
The homogeneity of  25-hydroxyvitamin D3 in SRM 1577c was assessed by analyzin g test portions of  2 g to 3 g with 
isotope dilution (ID) with liquid chromatography (LC) and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) detection.  Analysis 
of variance at a 5  % significance level indicated homogeneity  for distribution of   25-hydroxyvitamin D3  within the 
uncertainty of the method. 
 
Analytical Approach for Determination of Elements :   All elements for which certified and reference values are 
provided were determined by using at least one of the following methods carried out at NIST:  INAA, radiochemical 
neutron activation 
pre-separation neutron activation analysis  (PNAA), inductively coupled plasma mass  spectrometry (ICP-MS), and 
ICP optical emission  spectrometry (ICP-OES).  NIST values for Cd, Pb, and Se were obtained by using isotope 
dilution (ID) ICP-MS, and for Hg by isotope dilution cold 
complemented by results provided by collaborating scientists from r esearch laboratories using   ICP-MS, ICP -OES, 
INAA, RNAA, and SS-GFAAS. 
 
Analytical Approach for Determination of 25 -Hydroxyvitamin D3:  The mass fraction of  25-hydroxyvitamin D3 
was  measured in duplicate  2.0 g to 3.0  g test port
ten bottles  of SRM  1577c, and 
25-hydroxyvitamin D3-13C5 was added as an internal standard.  Prior to extraction, the samples of SRM  1577c were 
incubated with lipase at 40 °C for 2 h to hydrolyze the fats.  Ethanol containing butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT) and 
potassium carbonate was added to each sample, and the analytes and internal sta ndards were extracted into hexane 
containing BHT by ov ernight stirring.  The samples were centrifuged, the supernatants were deca
nted, and an 
additional aliquot of hexane containing BHT was added.  Samples were extra
sonication and rotary mixing, then centrifuged, and the supernatants combined with those from the previous extraction.  
An additional cycle of sonication and rotary mixing was conducted, for a total of three extractions.  The pooled organic 
layers were dried under nitrogen to approximately 40 mL and magnesium sulfate was added.  Following vortex mixing 
and centrifugation, the organic layer was decanted and evaporated to dryness unde
derivatized with 4 -phenyl-1,2,4-triazoline-3,5-dione (PTAD) and reconstituted in a mixture of methanol and   ethyl 
acetate for analysis by positive-ion mode LC-MS/MS.  A gradient method with a water/methanol mobile phase and a 
-Hydroxyvitamin D3+PTAD and 
pentafluorophenyl column were used for LC
25-hydroxyvitamin D3-13C5+PTAD were measure d at transitions  m/z 558 → m/z 298 and  m/z 563 → m/z 298, 
respectively.  Calibrants were prepared gravimetrically, at levels intended to approximate the level of the vitamin  in 
-hydroxyvitamin D3 calibrant material was determined at 
the SRM following extraction.  The purity of the neat 25
NIST using LC -absorbance, Karl Fischer titration, thermogravimetric analysis, a
nd quantitative proton nuclear 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy.  A single internal standard solution was used for the calibrants and samples. 
 
 

vapor (ID/CV) ICP-MS.  The measurements were 

analysis (PGAA), pre -concentration and 

cted further by a combination of 

r nitrogen.  The analytes were 

-MS/MS determination.  25

ions taken from each of 

 

SRM 1577c  

 

Page 3 of 6 

Certified Values   for Elements :   Certified values  were  derived from the NIST analytical results and the results 
provided by collaborating laboratories. 
  The uncertainty listed with each value is an expanded uncertainty, with 
coverage factor 2 (approximately 95 % confidence).  The reporting follows the JCGM Guide [4-6].  The measurands 
are the total mass fraction of the elements listed in Table  1.  The certified values are metrological ly traceable to the SI -
derived unit for mass fraction (expressed as percent, micrograms per kilogram, or milligrams per kilogram). 
 
For each element, there is a NIST result with an uncertainty that is complete in terms of coverage of recognized sources 
of uncertainties.  Except for the elements measured by a single NIST primary method, these results are combined with 
results with similarly complete uncertainties from collaborating laborat
without complete uncertainties.  The uncertainties of these results were augmented  for probable bias on the basis of 
the differences among the results obtained by different methods [4]. 
 

ories, and in certain cases several results 

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fraction Values for Elements (Dry-Mass Basis) in SRM 1577c 

‘s  for  Elements 

 

Element 

Potassium (K)(A,a,d,F) 
Sodium (Na)(A,a,d) 
 
 

Mass Fraction 
(%) 

1.023  ± 
0.2033  ± 

0.064 
0.0064 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

 
 
 

Calcium (Ca)(A,a,D,d) 
Cobalt (Co)(A,a,b) 
Copper (Cu)(A,a,C,D,d) 
Iron (Fe)(A,a,D) 
Magnesium (Mg)(A,a,D,d) 
Manganese (Mn)(A,a,b,D,d) 
Molybdenum (Mo)(A,a,b,C,D,d) 
Selenium (Se)(A,E) 
Zinc (Zn)(A,a,D,E,h) 

±  10 

  131 
0.300  ± 
 
± 
  275.2 
± 
  197.94 
±  42 
  620 
± 
  10.46 
3.30 
 
± 
2.031  ± 
 
± 
  181.1 

0.018 
4.6 
0.65 

0.47 
0.13 
0.045 
1.0 

Element 

Sulfur (S)(a,D,d,F) 
 
 

 

Arsenic (As)(C) 
Cadmium (Cd)(C,E) 
Chromium (Cr)(A) 
Lead (Pb)(E) 
Nickel (Ni)(B,b,c) 
Silver (Ag)(A,B,b,C) 
Strontium (Sr)(B,b,d) 
Vanadium (V)(c,d,G) 
 

Mass Fraction 
(%) 

0.749  ± 

0.034 

Mass Fraction 
(µg/kg) 

19.6 
± 
97.0(g)  ± 
± 
53 
± 
62.8 
± 
44.5 
± 
5.9 
95.3 
± 
8.17  ± 

1.4 
1.4 

14 

1.0 
9.2 
1.6 
4.2 
0.66 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ID ICP-MS 

NOTE:  Analytical techniques used for assignment of certified values; capital letters indicate that the method was used by NIST. 
(A,a)  INAA 
(B,b)  ICP-MS 
(C,c)  RNAA 
(D,d)  ICP-OES 
(E) 
(F)  PGAA 
(G)  Pre-concentration pre-separation PNAA 
(h)  SS-GFAAS 
(g)  Alternate statistical method [7]. 
 
 
Certified Value for 25-Hydroxyvitamin D3:  The certified value was derived from the NIST analytical results and 
the results provided by collaborating laboratories.  The uncertainty provided with the value is an expanded uncertainty 
about the mean to cover the measurand with approximately 95 % confidence.  The expanded uncertainty is calculated 
as  U = kuc, where the combined uncertainty  uc  incorporates the observed difference between the results from the 
methods and their respective uncertainties,  consistent with the  JCGM Guide and with its  Supplement 1, and  k is a 
coverage factor corresponding to approximately 95 % confidence [6,8,9].  The measurand is the total mass fraction of 
25-hydroxyvitamin D3 listed in Table 2.  The certified value is metrologically traceable to the SI -derived unit for mass 
fraction (expressed as nanograms per gram). 
 

Table 2.  Certified Mass Fraction Value for 25-Hydroxyvitamin D3 in SRM 1577c 

25-H 

 

 

Element 

Mass Fraction 
g)
(ng/g) 

25-Hydroxyvitamin D3 

  13.7 

± 

3.1 

SRM 1577c  

 

Page 4 of 6 

Reference Values:  Reference values are based on results from one method carri ed out at NIST or at NIST and in 
several collaborating laboratories.  The methods of combining the results
  of  different methods from different 
laboratories were applied as above.  These results do  not fulfill the criteria for certification because they lack a  full 
estimate of method bias.  The reporting follows the  JCGM Guide [6].  The measurands are the total mass fraction s of 
the elements listed in Table 3 as determined by the methods indicated.  The reference values are metrologically traceable 
to the SI-derived unit for mass fraction (expressed as percent, micrograms per kilogram, or milligrams per kilogram ), as 
realized by the method(s) used. 
 

Table 3.  Reference Mass Fraction Values for Elements (Dry-Mass Basis) in SRM 1577c 
Values  for  Elements 

s)  in  SRM

Element 

Chlorine (Cl)(A,a) 
Hydrogen (H)(D) 
Nitrogen (N)(D) 
Phosphorus (P)(C,c) 
 
 

Mass Fraction 
(%) 

0.287  ±  0.013 
 
 
7.35  ±  0.24 
  10.30  ±  0.34 
 
1.175  ±  0.027 
 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

Rubidium (Rb)(A,a) 

  35.3 

±  1.1 

 

Element 

Antimony (Sb)(a,B) 
Cesium (Cs)(A,a) 
Mercury (Hg)(E) 
 
 
 

Mass Fraction 
(µg/kg) 

3.13  ±  0.31 
±  1.4 
5.36  ±  0.17 

 
  21.7 
 
 
 
 

 

ID/CV ICP-MS 

NOTE:  Analytical techniques used for assignment of reference values; capital letters indicate that the method was used by NIST. 
(A,a)  INAA 
(B)  RNAA 
(C,c)  ICP-OES 
(D)  PGAA 
(E) 
 
 
Information Values:   Information values are given to assist users in the assays of two non -certified elements that 
may be of interest in method development and other investigations.  Thes e information values are based on results 
that did not allow complete assessment of all  sources of uncertainty.   The measurands are the total mass fractions of 
the elements listed in Table 4 as determined by the method indicated. 
 

Table 4.  Information Mass Fraction Values for Elements (Dry-Mass Basis) in SRM 1577c 

‘s  for  Elements 

 

 

Element 

Mass Fraction 

Lithium (Li)(a) 
Silicon (Si)(a) 

12  µg/kg 
6  mg/kg 

(a) ICP-OES by a laboratory collaborating with NIST  
 
 
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION 

 
)
%
(

 
e
m
u
l
o
V

  

  

  

  

  

    
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

10 
Size  (um) 

100 

 
 
 
Particle size: 
Figure 1.  Particle size distributions in 
aqueous suspension via laser light scattering instrumentation 
(Malvern  Mastersizer 2000).    Calculated 10, 50, and  90 percentile 
particle sizes (percent volume of particles smaller than the value) for 
0.1 = 2.31 µm, d 0.5 = 7.57 µm, d 0.9 = 28.5 µm.  
SRM 1577c are:  d
Uncertainties in these values are estimated at ± 10 % relative (2s). 
 
 
 

SRM 1577c determined in 

 

SRM 1577c  

 

Page 5 of 6 

 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  May, W.; Parris, R.; Beck II, C.; Fassett, J.; Greenberg, R.; Guenther, F.; Kramer, G.; Wise, S.; Gills, T.; Colbert, J.; 
Gettings, R.; MacDonald,  B.;  Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value
-Assignment of Reference 
Materials for Chemical Meas urements;  NIST Special Publication 260 -136; U.S.  Government Printing Office:  
Washington, DC (2000); available at: https://www.nist.gov/srm/publications.cfm (accessed Oct 2018). 

[2]  Roseland, J.M.; Patterson, K.Y.; Andrews, K.W.; Phillips, K.M.; Phillips, M.M.; Pehrsson, P.R.; Dufresne, G.L.; 
Jakobsen, J.;  Gusev, P.A.;  Savarala, S.;  Nguyen, Q.V.;  Makowski, A.J.;  Scheuerell, C.R.;  Larouche, G.P.; 
Wise, S.A.;  Harnly, J.M.;  Williams, J.R.;  Betz, J.M.;  Taylor, C.L.;  Interlaboratory Trial for Measurement of 
Vitamin D and 25
Chromatography–Mass Spectrometry; J. Agric. Food Chem., Vol. 64, pp. 3167–3175 (2016). 

-Hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D] in Foods and a Dietary Supplement Using Liquid 

[3]  Zeisler, R., The Sampling and Analysis of Human Livers, J. Res. Nat. Bur. Stand., Vol. 91, p. 75–85 (1986). 
[4]  Levenson, M.S.;  Banks, D.L.;  Eberhardt, K.R.;  Gill, L.M.;  Guthrie, W.F.;  Liu, H.K.;  Vangel, M.G.;  Yen, J.H.; 
Zhang, N.F.; An Approach to Combining Results from Multiple Methods Motivated by the ISO GUM, J. Res. Nat. 
Inst. Stand. Technol., Vol. 105, pp. 571–579 (2000). 

[5]  Rukhin, A.L.; Vangel, M.G.; Estimation of a Common Mean and Weighted Means Statistics; J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 

Vol. 93, pp. 301–308 (2000). 

[6]  JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data  — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement  
 (JCGM) (2 008); available at 

(GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections); Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology
https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Oct 2018); see also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt,  C.E.;  Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST  Measurement 
Results; NIST Technical Note  1297; U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington,
 DC (1994); available at 
https://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/tn1297/index.cfm (accessed Oct 2018). 

[7]  Schiller, S.; Eberhardt, K.; Combining Data from Independent Chemical Analysis Methods ; Spectrochim. Acta, 

Vol. 46B, pp. 1607–1613 (1991). 

3] 
[8]  JCGM 101:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data – Supplement 1 to the Guide to Expression of Uncertainty in 

; JCGM  (2008); available at 

Measurement,  Propagation of Distributions Using a Monte Carlo Method
https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_101_2008_E.pdf (accessed Oct 2018). 
| 
[9]  Efron, B.; Tibshirani, R.J.; An Introduction to the Bootstrap; Chapman & Hall, London, UK (1993). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
editorial 
Certificate Revision History:    09 October 2018  (Addition of certified value for  25-hydroxyvitamin D3;  change of expiration date;  editorial 
   
changes); 06 January 2016 (Editorial changes); 15 June 2009 (Original certificate date). 
 
 
 
Users of this SRM   should ensure that the Certificate of Analysis in their possession is c
accomplished by contacting the SRM Program:  telephone (301
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 

) 948-3730; e -mail 

) 975-2200; fax (301

urrent.  This can be 

hydroxy  vitamin 

9 

SRM 1577c  

 

Page 6 of 6 

