ce 
‘ Ea j  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology 

Sares oF 

Certificate 

Standard  Reference  Material®  1900 

Silicon  Nitride  Powder-Specific  Surface  Area  Standard 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  is  intended  for  use  in  the  calibration  of  instruments  used  to  measure  specific 
The  SRM  unit  consists  of  a  single  bottle  containing 
surface  area  (SSA)  in  the  range  of  0.1  m’/g  to  1000  m’/g. 
approximately  4  g  of  silicon  nitride  powder. 
static  volumetric 
type  Brunauer-Emmett-Teller  (BET)  (nitrogen  gas)  instrument  using  a  pellet  cell. 

The  SSA  of  this  material  was  measured  using  a 

Table  1.  Certified  SSA  Values  and  Uncertainties  (20)  by  Nitrogen  BET 

  

Measurement  Technique 

Specific  Surface  Area 

  

Multipoint 

    
    
  

2.79  m7/g  +  0.07  m7/g 

Single  Point 

2.85  m?/g  +  0.09  m7/g 

Expiration  of  Certification:  The  certification  of 
stated 
uncertainties,  provided  the  SRM  is  stored  and  handled  in  accordance  with  the  Storage  and  Handling  and 
Instructions  for  Use  sections  of 
the  SRM  is 
contaminated  or  otherwise  altered. 

this  SRM  is  deemed  to  be  indefinite  within  the 

However,  certification  will 

be  nullified 

certificate. 

this 

if 

Samples  from  the 
Storage  and  Handling:  Silicon  nitride  is  typically  inert  under  ambient  and  testing  conditions. 
original  bottle  may  be  returned  to  the  bottle  and  reused  provided  that  the  Instructions  for  Use,  Sampling  Procedure 
and  Outgassing  Procedure  are  strictly  followed. 

Cautions  to  User:  This  SRM  is  not  certified  for  pore  size  distribution,  sample  density,  adsorption/desorption 
isotherm  form,  or  particle  size  by  any  other  method.  While  the  SSA  of  this  SRM  was  determined  using  a 
static 
is  possible  that  different  methods  of  gas  adsorption 
volumetric  BET  type  of  instrument  using  nitrogen  gas,  it 
surface  area  analysis  (e.g.,  flowing  gas  analysis/dynamic  gas  analysis)  may  be  used. 
Its  suitability  for  use  with  a 
different  gas  is  undetermined. 
The  user  must  determine  the  effect  of  different  methods  and  measurement 
dynamics  on  the  SSA  of  this  SRM. 

Coordination  for  this  SRM  was  provided  by  8.G.  Malghan,  S.J.  Dapkunas,  and  G.  Onoda  of  the  NIST  Ceramics 
Division. 

The  BET  measurement  technique,  development,  and  certification  was  performed  by  D.B.  Minor  of  the  NIST 
Ceramics  Division. 

Statistical  analysis  was  performed  by  S.D.  Leigh  of  the  NIST  Statistical  Engineering  Division. 

The  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through 
the  Standard  Reference  Program  by  R.J.  Gettings. 

Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 
Certificate  Issue  Date: 

19  March  1998 

Thomas  E.  Gills,  Chief 
Standard  Reference  Materials  Program 

SRM  1900 

Page  1  of 3

Certification  Technique  and  Uncertainties:  The  SSA  of  SRM  1900  was  determined  on  20  randomly  selected 
This  SRM  is  certified  for  both  multipoint  (MP)  and  single  point  (SP)  analysis 
bottles  from  the  production  run. 
using  nitrogen  gas  as  the  adsorbate  and  using  a 
static  volumetric  type  of  instrument  based  upon  the  BET  method 
[1].  The  certified  specific  surface  area  values  and  the  expanded  uncertainties  assigned,  computed  according  to  the 
ISO  Guide  [2], 
level  of  confidence  includes 
The  certified  value  and  expanded 
uncertainty  due  to  measurement  imprecision  as  well  as  material  variation. 
uncertainty  define  a  range  of  values  within  which  the  true  specific  surface  area  is  expected  to  lie  with  at 
least  95  %  confidence. 

are  listed  in  Table  1.  The  expanded  uncertainty  at  the  95 

% 

Two  main 
RM  8570  Calcined  Kaolin  (surface  area)  was  used  as  a  reference  in  the  evaluation  of  SRM  1900. 
advantages  of  using  SRM  1900  over  RM  8570  are  that  the  sample  preparation  method  for  SRM  1900  is  easier, 
and  bound  water  of  hydration  is  not  an  issue  [3]. 

The  following  instructions  are  based  upon  using  a  Quantachrome  Autosorb  1,  Model  AS-1-11' 
Instructions  for  Use: 
using  the  pellet  cell.  Use  of  a  large  internal  diameter  cell  will  most  likely  yield  an  SSA,  both  single  point  and  multipoint, 
higher  than  the  stated  value  for  this  SRM.  The  effect  of  using  a  larger  volume  cell  has  not  been  determined  by  NIST.  If 
using  equipment  other  than  that  listed  above,  consult  the  equipment  manufacturer's  operating  instructions  for 
variations  in  testing  procedure.  The  sampling  and  outgassing  procedures  described  below  should  always  be  followed. 
The  sample  preparation  procedure  was  developed  at  NIST  for  the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy  and  the  International 
Energy  Agency  [4]. 

Sampling  Procedure:  Pour  the  entire  contents  of  the  bottle  onto  a  suitable  piece  of  weighing  paper  and  quarter 
Scoop  enough  material  from  each  of  the  quarters  so  that  the  entire  amount  is  sufficient  for 
the  resulting  pile. 
analysis. 
The  mass  to  be  analyzed  should  be  between  0.1  g  and  0.25  g.  Return  the  rest  of  the  sample  to  the 
bottle,  recap,  and  reserve  for  future  use.  The  bulk  sample  need  not  be  kept  under  vacuum  or  in  a  desiccator. 

Outgassing  Procedure:  Pre-weigh  an  empty  sample  tube  and  filler  rod  and  record  this  empty  mass  to  the  closest 
0.0001  g.  Place  the  sample  into  the  analysis  tube  per  manufacturer's  instructions  or  accepted  practice. 
Evacuate 
the  sample  tube  to  less  than  1.3  Pa  (10  mTorr)  and  heat  the  sample  to  200  °C  for  2  h.  At  the  end  of  this  time, 
turn  off  the  heat,  remove  the  heating  mantle  and  allow  the  sample  to  come  to  ambient  temperature.  Back  fill  that 
Calculate  the  sample  mass  by 
sample  with  He  gas,  and  weigh  to  the  closest  0.0001  g.  This  is  the  filled  mass. 
difference. 
Immediately  perform  the  analysis  following  the  manufacturer's  directions  or  the  user's  particular 
method. 

Additional  Noncertified  Information: 
SRM  1900  is  given  in  Table  2. 

A  typical  analysis  of  the  nitrogen  gas  used  during  the  certification  of 

Table  2.  Typical  Gas  Analysis 

Gas 
Grade 
Assay 
oO, 
H,0 
Total  Hydrocarbons 

Nitrogen 
Industrial 
99.995  % 
<20  mg/kg 
<16  mg/kg 
mg/kg 
<5 

‘Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments,  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  describe  the  experimental 
procedure.  Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology,  nor 
does  it  imply  that  the  materials  or  equipment  are  the  best  available  for  the  purpose, 

SRM  1900 

Page  2  of 3

REFERENCES 

(1) 
[2] 

(3) 

[4] 

Brunauer,  S.,  Emmett,  P.,  and  Teller,  E.,  J.  Amer.  Chem.  Soc.,  60,  p.  309,  (1938). 
Guide  to  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in  Measurement,  ISBN  92-67-10188-9, 
1st 
Switzerland,  (1993). 
Colbert,  J.C.,  Report  of  Investigation  of  Surface  Area  Reference  Material  8570  Kaolin,  National  Institute  of 
Standards  and  Technology,  Gaithersburg,  MD,  (1994). 
Malghan,  S.G.,  Hausner,  H.,  Pompe,  R.,  Tsubaki,  J.,  and  Hsu,  §.M.,  Development  and  Testing  of 
Procedures  for  Characterization  of  Ceramic  Powders,  YEA  ANNEX  11,  Subtask  6,  prepared  by  NIST  for  the 
U.S.  Department  of  Energy,  Oak  Ridge  National  Laboratory,  (Sept.  1993). 

Geneva, 

ISO, 

Ed. 

This  can  be 
it  is  the  responsibility  of  users  of  this  SRM  to  assure  that  the  certificate  in  their  possession  is  current. 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program  at:  Phone  (301)  975-6776  (select  “Certificates”),  Fax  (301)  926- 
4751,  e-mail  srminfo@nist.  gov,  or  via  the  internet  hitp://ts.nist.  gov/srm. 

SRM  1900 

Page  3  of 3

