National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 1951b 

 

 
Lipids in Frozen Human Serum 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  evaluating  the  accuracy  of  clinical 
procedures  for  the  determination  of  total  cholesterol,  high-density  lipoprotein  (HDL)-cholesterol,  low-density 
lipoprotein  (LDL)-cholesterol,  and  triglycerides  (both  total  glyceride  species  and  triglycerides  only)  in  human 
serum.  It is also intended for use in validating working or secondary reference materials.  A unit of SRM 1951b 
consists of four bottles of frozen human serum, two bottles each of two different analyte concentration levels.  Each 
bottle contains 1 mL of human serum. 
 
Certified  Concentration  Values:    The  certified  concentrations  of  total  cholesterol  and  triglycerides  were 
determined  at  NIST  using  isotope  dilution/gas  chromatography/mass  spectrometry (ID/GC/MS)  definitive 
methods [1].    The  concentrations  and  their  expanded  uncertainties  for  the  two  concentration  levels  (SRM 1951b 
Level I  and  Level II)  are  listed  in  Table 1a  in  mmol/L  and  in  Table 1b  in  mg/dL  (as  triolein  for  the 
triglycerides).  The triglycerides concentrations are reported two ways: as total glycerides (the molar sum of free 
glycerol,  monoglycerides,  diglycerides,  and  triglycerides)  and  as  triglycerides  only.    The  certified  concentrations 
apply only to serum thawed to room temperature, 20 °C to 25 °C (see “Instructions for Storage and Use”). 
 
Reference  Concentration  Values:    Reference  concentration  values  for  HDL-cholesterol,  LDL-cholesterol,  total 
cholesterol, and triglycerides, provided by the Lipid Reference Laboratory at the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC), are reported in Table 2.  These results were determined using CDC reference methods for lipids.   
 
Expiration  of  Certification:    The  certification  of  SRM 1951b  is  valid,  within  the  measurement  uncertainty 
specified,  until  31 December 2015,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  in  accordance  with  instructions  given  in  this 
certificate  (see  “Instructions  for  Storage  and  Use”).    The  certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is  damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified.  
 
Maintenance  of  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If  substantive 
technical changes occur that affect the certification before expiration, NIST will notify the purchaser.  Registration 
(see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
The overall direction and coordination of the analyses at NIST were under the chairmanship of M.J. Welch of the 
NIST  Analytical  Chemistry  Division.    The  overall  coordination  of  the  measurements  at  CDC  was  under  the 
direction of M.M. Kimberly of the CDC Lipid Reference Laboratory. 
 
The analytical measurements at NIST were performed by L.T. Sniegoski, S.S.-C. Tai, and M.J. Welch of the NIST 
Analytical Chemistry Division.  Analytical measurements at CDC were performed by S.H. Edwards and S. Stribling 
of the CDC Division of Laboratory Sciences. 
 
The sampling protocol and statistical analysis of the data were performed by N.-F. Zhang of the NIST Statistical 
Engineering Division. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the NIST Measurement Services 
Division. 
 

 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  09 September 2010 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

SRM 1951b 

Stephen A. Wise, Chief 
Analytical Chemistry Division 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

Page 1 of 4 

NOTICE AND WARNINGS TO USERS  
 
SRM 1951b  IS  INTENDED  FOR  IN-VITRO  DIAGNOSTIC  USE  ONLY.    THIS  IS  A  HUMAN  SOURCE 
MATERIAL.    HANDLE  PRODUCT  AS  A  BIOHAZARDOUS  MATERIAL  CAPABLE  OF  TRANSMITTING 
INFECTIOUS DISEASE.  The supplier of this serum has reported that each donor unit of serum or plasma used in 
the  preparation  of  this  product  was  tested  by  an  FDA-approved  method  and  was  found  to  be  nonreactive  for 
hepatitis B  surface  antigen (HbsAG),  hepatitis C  virus (HCV),  and  human  immunodeficiency  virus (HIV)-1 
antibodies.  However, no known test method can offer complete assurance that hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, 
HIV, or other infectious agents are absent from this material.  Accordingly, this human blood-based product should 
be  handled  at  the  Biosafety  Level 2  or  higher  as  recommended  for  any  POTENTIALLY  INFECTIOUS HUMAN 
SERUM  OR  BLOOD  SPECIMEN  in  the  Center  for  Disease  Control (CDC)/National  Institutes  of  Health (NIH) 
Manual [2]. 
 
Stability:  The material is kept at –80 °C for long term storage at NIST.  Under these conditions, the analytes are 
expected to be stable.   
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage:  The serum is shipped frozen (on dry ice), and upon receipt, should be stored frozen until ready for use.  A 
freezer temperature of –20 °C is acceptable for storage up to one week.  If a longer storage time is anticipated, the 
material should be stored at or below –60 °C.  The SRM should not be exposed to sunlight or ultraviolet radiation.  
Storage of thawed material at room or refrigerator temperatures may result in changes in the analyte concentrations. 
 
Use:    Bottles  of  the  SRM  to  be  analyzed  should  be  removed  from  the  freezer  and  allowed  to  stand  at  room 
temperature until thawed.  After the material is thawed to room temperature, it should be used immediately.  The 
material should be swirled gently to mix it before aliquots are withdrawn. 
 
SOURCE, PREPARATION, AND ANALYSIS1 
 
Source  of  Material:    SRM 1951b  Lipids  in  Frozen  Human  Serum  was  prepared  by  the  Solomon  Park  Research 
Laboratories (Kirkland, WA) following a protocol developed by the Cholesterol Reference Materials Subcommittee 
of  the  National  Committee  for  Clinical  Laboratory  Standards (NCCLS)  under  the  chairmanship  of  G.L. Myers  of 
the  CDC [3].    The  goal  of  the  NCCLS  project  was  to  develop  a  commutable  lipid  reference  material  for  total 
cholesterol that would be useful in most presently available field methods.  A large-scale study of a prior lot of this 
material involving most of the major clinical measurement systems found no significant biases between results on 
this  prior  lot  and  those  from  fresh,  unpooled  serum.    The  study  verified  that  material  prepared  following  the 
recommendations  of  the  NCCLS  study  is  an  appropriate  mechanism  for  transferring  accuracy  from  the  definitive 
and reference methods to the clinical laboratories without significant matrix effects on the systems tested.  
 
Preparation of Material:  Donor units were collected and allowed to clot at room temperature for 4 h.  The serum 
was  removed  from  the  clot  and  immediately  cooled  to  approximately  4 °C.    Each  unit  of  donor  serum  was  then 
analyzed for total cholesterol content to determine which donor units to pool.  The donor units selected were then 
pooled.  One-milliliter aliquots of the bulk pool were dispensed into 3 mL glass bottles and frozen at –70 °C.  This 
was accomplished within 50 hours of the initial donor unit collection. 
 
Analytical Methods:  For the determination of the certified concentrations and uncertainties, a stratified sampling 
plan was devised to test for homogeneity across the manufacturing process.  One group of samples was used for the 
determination of total cholesterol; a second set was used for the total glycerides and triglycerides.  A method based 
on ID/GC/MS and considered to be a definitive method [1] for total serum cholesterol by the NCCLS was used for 
the  determination  of  total  cholesterol [4].    The  total  glycerides  and  triglycerides  were  determined  using  the  NIST 
ID/GC/MS method for these analytes [5].  These methods are also recognized as approved higher-order reference 
measurement procedures by the Joint Committee on Traceability in Laboratory Medicine (JCTLM) [6]. 
 
HDL-cholesterol  and  LDL-cholesterol  were determined at CDC using the betaquantification reference method [7] 
used in the Cholesterol Reference Method Laboratory Network (CRMLN).  In addition, CDC provided results for 
total  cholesterol  using  the  AbellKendall  reference  method [7]  and  for  total  triglyceride  (after  subtraction  of  free 
glycerol) using the chromotropic reference method [7] used in the CRMLN. 

                                                           

1Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments,  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental  procedure.  Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  National  Institute  of 
Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the 
purpose. 
SRM 1951b 

Page 2 of 4 

 
 

 

 
 

Table 1a.  Certified Concentration Values and Uncertainties for Analytes in SRM 1951b in mmol/L 

Table 1b.  Certified Concentration Values and Uncertainties for Analytes in SRM 1951b in mg/dL 

Analyte 

Total Cholesterol 
Total Glycerides 
Triglycerides only 
 
 

 
Analyte 
 
 
Total Cholesterol 
Total Glycerides 
Triglycerides only 

Level I  
(mmol/L) 
 

4.804    0.014 
 
1.208    0.013 

 

 

Level II 
(mmol/L) 

6.895    0.022  
2.988    0.036 
2.700    0.027 

  Level I 
  (mg/dL)(a) 

185.76    0.55 
 
  1.2 

 
107.0 

 

Level II 
(mg/dL)(a) 

 

266.58 
264.6 
239.1 

  0.84  
  3.2 
  2.4 

 
(a) Total glycerides and triglycerides results are expressed as milligrams triolein per deciliter. 
 
Each certified value is the mean of measurements made using definitive methods [4,5].  The expanded uncertainty, 
U, for each certified value is calculated from the equation, U = kuc, where uc is the combined standard uncertainty 
calculated  according  to  the  ISO  Guide [8].    The  coverage  factor,  k = 2,  is  determined  from  the  Student’s 
t-distribution corresponding to the calculated effective degrees of freedom and 95 % level of confidence. 

 
 
Table 2.  Reference Concentration Values and Uncertainties for HDL-Cholesterol, 
LDL-Cholesterol, Total Cholesterol, and Triglycerides 

Analyte 
 
 
HDL-Cholesterol 
LDL-Cholesterol 
Total Cholesterol(b) 
Triglycerides 

  Level I 
  (mg/dL)(a) 

48.7 
113.2 
187.4 
106.6 

  0.9 
  3.1 
  0.4 
  0.5 

Level II 
(mg/dL)(a) 

 

51.9 
152.6 
269.2 
239.8 

  1.0   
  3.0 
  0.6 
  1.0 

 
(a) Triglycerides results are expressed as milligrams triolein per deciliter. 
(b) Total cholesterol as determined by the Abell-Kendall reference method [7] 
 
The uncertainty in each reference value is for an individual measurement.  It is expressed as an expanded uncertainty, U, 
at the 95 % level of confidence, and is calculated according to the method described in the ISO Guide [8].  The expanded 
uncertainty is calculated as U = kuc, where uc is intended to represent, at the level of one standard deviation, the combined 
effect  of  within-run  variation  and  material  inhomogeneity.    The  coverage  factor,  k = 2,  is  determined  from  the 
Student’s t-distribution corresponding to the calculated effective degrees of freedom and 95 % level of confidence. 
 
 

SRM 1951b 

Page 3 of 4 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  NCCLS; Development of Definitive Methods for the National Reference System for the Clinical Laboratory, 
Approved  Guideline;  NCCLS  Publication  NRSCL  1-A,  National  Committee  for  Clinical  Laboratory 
Standards: Wayne, PA (1991).  

[2]  Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 

U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (1988).  

[3]  NCCLS;  Preparation  and  Validation  of  Commutable  Frozen  Human  Serum  Pools  as  Secondary  Reference 
Materials  for  Cholesterol  Measurement  Procedures;  NCCLS  Publication  C37-A,  National  Committee  for 
Clinical Laboratory Standards: Wayne, PA (2000). 

[4]  Ellerbe, P.; Meiselman, S.; Sniegoski, L.T.; Welch, M.J.; White, V.E.; Determination of Serum Cholesterol by 
a  Modification  of  the  Isotope  Dilution  Mass  Spectrometric  Definitive  Method;  Anal.  Chem.,  Vol. 61, 
pp. 17181723 (1989). 

[5]  Ellerbe, P.;  Sniegoski, L.T.;  Welch, M.J.;  Isotope  Dilution  Mass  Spectrometry  as  a  Candidate  Definitive 
Method  for  Determining  Total  Glycerides  and  Triglycerides  in  Serum;  Clin.  Chem.,  Vol. 41,  pp. 397404 
(1995). 
Joint Committee on Traceability in Laboratory Medicine (JCTLM) Home Page. 
http://www.bipm.org/en/committees/jc/jctlm/ (accessed Sep 2010). 

[6] 

[8] 

[7]  Myers, G.L.; Cooper, G.R.; Greenberg, N.; Kimberly, M.M.; Waymack, P.P.; Hassemer, D.J.; Standardization 
of Lipid and Lipoprotein Measurements.  In:  Rifai, N.; Warnick, G.R.; Dominiczak, M.H., Eds.; Handbook of 
Lipoprotein Testing, 2nd ed., AACC: Washington, D.C., pp. 717–748. 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(ISO  GUM 1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Sep 2010);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results; NIST Technical Note 1297; U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (1994); available at 
http://www.nist.gov/physlab/pubs/index.cfm (accessed Sep 2010). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certificate Revision History:  09 September 2010 (Removal of certified values in Level 1 for total glycerides because of instability; extension 
of expiration date; editorial changes); 14 March 2007 (Editorial changes); 03 August 2006 (Update of expiration date, addition of Table 2, and 
editorial changes); 14 May 2004 (This revision adds Levels I and II values for triglycerides and changes the material name); 03 February 2004 
(Original certificate date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
(301) 926-4751; 
telephone 
accomplished  by  contacting 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

fax 

 

SRM 1951b 

Page 4 of 4 

