Rite  ast 
U.S.  Departhigiiof  Commerce 

Malco 

olne  Baldrige 
pecretary/ 
    i 
ap 
  
of  Standards 
Bureaa 
‘Ambler,  Di 
Director 

mbler, 
Sct 

Migs  oe 

National 
Ernest 

National  Bureau  of  Standards 

Goertificate 

Standard  Reference  Material  1965 

Microsphere  Slide  (10-um  Polystyrene  Spheres) 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  intended  for  use  as  an  optical  microscopy  measurement  standard  and  teaching 
a  microscope  slide  with  two  different  groupings  of  10-ym  “‘space  beads’’  permanently  deposited  on  the 
tool.  The  SRM  is 
surface  and  sealed  in  an  air  chamber  (Figure  1).  Each  slide  contains  a  few  thousand  microspheres.  The  microspheres  are 
from  SRM  1960,  Nominal  10-sm  Diameter  Polystyrene  Spheres,  the  first  commercially  available  made-in-space  product. 
The  microspheres  in  SRM  1965  are  deposited  in  two  different  groupings:  hexagonally  ordered  arrays  and  unordered  clusters. 
The  number  average  diameter  of  the  particles  in  both  groupings  were  measured  by  Center  Distance  Finding  (CDF),  an  optical 
technique  related  to  array  sizing  [1].  The  certified  values  are: 

Hexagonal  array 
Unordered  clusters 

_Number  Average  Diameter,  wm  _

_

 

  

9.94 
9.89 

Uncertainty,  pm 

+0.04 
+0.04 

The  uncertainty  consists  of  both  random  and  systematic  errors,  and  includes  sample-to-sample  variability. 
The  number  average  diameter  of  the  particles  in  the  unordered  clusters  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  microspheres  in  SRM  1960, 
from  which  the  slides  were  prepared.  The  number  average  diameter  of  the  spheres  as  measured  in  the  hexagonal  arrays  is 
slightly  greater  due  to  a  combination  of  three  effects:  (1)  the  measured  mean  diameter  of  spheres  in  hexagonal  arrays  is  larger 
than  the  actual  mean  diameter  by  0.04  ym  due  to  the  Kubitschek  Effect  (See  SP  260-107  for  detailed  discussion);  (2)  the 
spheres  are  slightly  swollen,  by  0.03  pm,  due  to  the  processing  required  to  produce  the  hexagonally-ordered  arrays,  and  (3) 
the  spheres  are  flattened  at  the  contact  areas  by  0.02  ym. 
The  size  distribution  of  the  polystyrene  spheres  from  which  SRM  1965  was  prepared,  as  determined  by  CDF  [1],  is  a  narrow 
Gaussian  with  a  standard  deviation  of  0.9%  (excluding  particles  with  diameters  not  on  the  main  peak).  The  number  of  under- 
sized  particles  is  negligible  and  the  number  of  oversized  particles  is  less  than  1%. 
The  microsphere  slide  is  expected  to  have  an  indefinite  shelf  life  as  long  as  the  sealed  cavity  is  not  disturbed  and  the  slide 
is  handled  with  normal  precautions  and  care. 
Recommended  Use:  SRM  1965  can  be  used  for  a  number  of  calibrations  and  exercises  in  micrometrology.  The  hexagonal 
arrays  can  be  used  as  a  two-dimensional  microlength  standard  to  replace  calibrated  ‘‘stage’’  micrometers.  The  hexagonal 
array  can  also  be  used  for  array  sizing,  diffraction  experiments  in  crystallography,  and  for  calibrating  microscope  image 
distortion  and  magnification.  These  applications,  and  a  number  of  other  exercises  and  techniques  for  optical  micrometrology 
are  described  in  detail  in  NBS  Special  Publication  SP  260-107,  which  is  supplied  with  the  SRM. 

. 

January  15,  1987 
Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 

Stanley  D.  Rasberry,  Chief 
Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials 

(Over)

  

The  technology  necessary  to  produce  these  latex  particles  was  developed  by  the  Lehigh  University  and  the  National 
Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration  (NASA)  during  five  shuttle  missions  in  1982  and  1983.  The  10-um  particles  in  this 
SRM  were  manufactured  in  space  aboard  the  Space  Shuttle  CHALLENGER  during  the  NASA  STS-6  mission,  4-9  April 
1983.  The  particles  were  provided  by  NASA  for  certification  by  NBS  as  a  Standard  Reference  Material  to  be  made  available 
to  the  scientific  and  technical  communities. 

The  technical  direction,  production  and  physical  measurements  leading  to  the  preparation  and  certification  were  provided 
by  A.W.  Hartman  of  the  Precision  Engineering  Division. 

Manufacture  of  the  particles  was  carried  out  under  the  direction  of  J.W.  Vanderhoff  of  the  Lehigh  University  and 
D.M.  Kornfeld  of  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation,  certification  and  issuance  of  this  Standard  Reference  Material 
were  coordinated  through  the  Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials  by  R.L.  McKenzie. 

[1]  Hartman,  A.W.,  Powder  Technol,  42  (1985)  269. 

SRM  1965,  Microsphere  slide 
10  pm  Polystyrene  Spheres 

Hexagonally 
Ordered  Array 

Unordered 
Ciusters

  

