National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Certificate 
Standard Reference Material® 2096 

 

 

 
High-Energy Charpy V-Notch Specimens 
18
 
(NIST-Verification, 8-mm Striker) 
 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended primarily for the verification of Charpy machines equipped with 
an  8-mm  striker,  in  accordance  with  the  current  ASTM  Standard E23 [1]  and  the  current  ISO  Standard 148-2 [2].  
Each SRM consists of a set of specimens needed to perform a single verification.  
 
Material Description:  SRM 2096 is made from 4340 alloy steel.  The bars are finished to length, heat-treated, and 
machined in SRM specimen lots ranging in size from 1200 to 3000 specimens.  Each specimen has a lot number and 
an identification number (three or four digits). 
 
SRM  Certification  Procedure:    Specimens  from  each  SRM  lot  are  tested  by  the  NIST  Applied  Chemicals  and 
Materials Division on Charpy reference machines.  These data are statistically evaluated to ensure the homogeneity 
of the lot, establish the certified value, and determine the number of SRM specimens required for a user to perform a 
valid test.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy, in that all 
known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [3].  The measurand is absorbed 
energy as measured by the NIST Charpy reference machines.  Traceability is to the SI unit joule. 
 
The certified value of the SRM is not given on this portion of the certificate.  The certified value and the uncertainty 
associated  with  it  are  given  in  the  verification  report  that  is  issued  by  NIST  following  the  verification  test  (see 
“Verification of the User’s Machine”).  If certified values are required immediately after testing  you  can  contact  the  
NIST    Charpy    Program    Coordinator    as    follows:    telephone  (303)  497-3351;  fax  (303)  497-5939;  or  e-mail 
charpy@boulder.nist.gov.  The lot number, serial number, and absorbed energy results of the tested specimens must 
be provided in order to obtain certified values. 
 
Expiration  of  Certification:    The  certified  value  and  uncertainty  furnished  in  the  verification  report  are  valid 
indefinitely.  The verification statement in the report that is issued for an acceptable machine is valid for a maximum 
of one year from the date on which the SRM was tested.  If a user’s machine is moved or undergoes any major repairs 
or  adjustments,  the  current  verification  will  be  invalidated,  and  the  machine  must  be  retested  and  reverified  (see 
“Instructions for Handling, Storage, and Use”). 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantial 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Overall  direction  and  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  verification  of  test  specimens  and 
machines, evaluation of test results, and issuance of the report on machine conformance are under the direction of the 
NIST Applied Chemicals and Materials Division, Boulder,  CO. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  17 January 2018 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

James Fekete, Chief 
Applied Chemicals and Materials Division 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Page 1 of 2 

  

SRM 2096 
 

ING,  STORAGE,  AND  USE 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
Handling:  The protective oil coating should be wiped from each specimen with a lint-free cloth just prior to testing. 
 
Storage:  The SRMs are anticipated to have an indefinite shelf life under normal storage conditions (20 °C ± 20 °C, ≤ 50 % 
relative humidity).  
 
Use:    Prior  to  verifying a  Charpy machine  equipped  with  an  8-mm  striker,  the  machine  should  be  checked  to  assure 
compliance  with  the  appropriate  sections  of  the  applicable  ASTM  or  ISO  Standard.    SRM  2096  shall  be  tested  at 
−40 °C ± 1 °C (−40 °F ± 2 °F) in accordance with the applicable standard (ASTM or ISO).  The energy level of the SRM 
appropriate for verifying the performance of a particular Charpy impact machine can be determined by considering the 
energy range that should be expected for the SRM, the maximum capacity of the machine, and the requirements of the 
applicable test method (ASTM or ISO).  The certified energy of SRM 2096 specimens is within the range of 88 J to 133 J. 
 
Verification of User’s Machine:  The NIST Charpy Program Coordinator will issue a verification report of findings to 
the  user’s  facility  upon  receipt  of  the  fractured  specimens  and  completed  questionnaire.    Fractured  specimens  and 
completed questionnaires should be returned to the NIST Charpy Program Coordinator, Mail Code 647, 325 Broadway, 
Boulder, CO  80305-3337.    A  plastic,  self-locking  bag  is  provided  for  the  return  of  broken  specimens.    The  broken 
specimen   shall  be  taped  together  as  described  in  the  wrapping  instructions  included  with  the  questionnaire.    The 
verification report is considered to be the second part of this certificate, and includes the certified value and uncertainty of 
the SRM. 
 
Shipping  Information:    Shipping  charges  for  the  return  of  broken  specimens  are  the  responsibility  of  the  user.    The 
mailing label provided with each SRM must be used to expedite shipping and, for overseas shipments, clearance by U.S. 
Customs. 
 
Note to International Customers:  Regular overseas shipments of broken specimens should be sent airmail so that after 
they are cleared by U.S. Customs, they can be forwarded directly to NIST-Boulder.  If a more rapid shipping mode is 
necessary,  choose  an  overnight  delivery  service  that  will  handle  U.S.  Customs  clearance  AND  will  deliver  directly  to 
NIST-Boulder.  Unless such delivery is assured, air freight packages may be returned to the customer by U.S. Customs. 
 
 

REFERENCES 

 
[1] ASTM E23; Standard Test Methods for Notched Bar Impact Testing of Metallic Materials; Annual Book of ASTM 

Standards, Vol. 03.01, ASTM, West Conshohocken, PA. 

[2] ISO 148-2;  Metallic  Materials  −  Charpy  Pendulum  Impact  Test  −  Part  2:  Verification  of  Testing  Machines; 

esting  M 

International Organization for Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland. 

[3] May, W.; Parris, R.; Beck II, C.; Fassett, J.; Greenberg, R.; Guenther, F.; Kramer, G.; Wise, S.; Gills, T.; Colbert, J.; 
Gettings, R.;  MacDonald, B.;  Definition  of  Terms  and  Modes  Used  at  NIST  for  Value-Assignment  of  Reference 
Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office: 
Washington, DC (2000);  available  at  http://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF (accessed Jan 2018). 

 
 
 
 
 

  
Certificate Revision History:  17 January 2018 (Title update; editorial changes); 14 February 2017 (Editorial changes); 20 December 2013 (Editorial 
     
changes); 13 June 2013 (Lot number removed from title; editorial changes); 31 August 1989 (Original SRM lot certificate date). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users of this SRM should ensure that the Certificate in their possession is current. This can be accomplished by contacting 
the  SRM  Program:  telephone  (301)  975-2200;  fax  (301)  948-3730;  e-mail  srminfo@nist.gov;  or  via  the  Internet  at 
http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

 

SRM 2096 

Page 2 of 2 

