U.  S.  Departmeritof  Commerce 
MaicoleeBaidrige 
‘Pecretary/ 
  
Bureaw.of  Standards 
  
Amb:  :  T,  Director 

National  | 
Ernest  ‘ 

-  ee 
Sata 

National  Bureau  of  Standards 

Standard  Reference  Material  2143 

Certificate 

p~Fluorobenzoic  Acid 

R.  A.  Paulson 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  is  highly  purified  p-fluorobenzoic  acid  certified  for  use  in  checking  microchemical 
procedures  for  the  determination  of  fluorine  in  organic  material. 

Fluorine... 

2.2...  eee  13.54  +  0.01  wt.  percent 

The  uncertainty  shown  represents  the  95  percent  confidence  interval  of  the  mean  based  on  16-determinations  and  allows 
for  the  effects  of  known  sources  of  possible  error.  Fluorine  was  determined  by  titration  of  the  hydrofluoric  acid  resulting 
from  combustion  of  the  material. 

Fluorine  was  determined  by  titration  of  the  hydrofluoric  acid  resulting  from  combustion  of  the  material.  A  one-gram 
sample  was  combusted  in  a  platinum-lined  Parr  oxygen  bomb  containing  20  mL  of  water.  A  weighed  aliquot  of  the 
solution  containing  the  combustion  products  was  titrated  with  0.1N  sodium  hydroxide.  In  the  titration,  which  was 
performed  in  a  platinum  crucible,  approximately  one-half  of  the  required  sodium  hydroxide  was  added.  The  solution 
was  then  heated  to  boiling  to  remove  carbon  dioxide  and  cooled.  The  titration  was  continued  under  an  atmosphere  of  air 
free  of  carbon  dioxide,to  a  pH  of  8.6.  In  most  cases  duplicate  aliquots  were  titrated.  Corrections  were  applied  for  nitric 
acid  formed  and  for  any  acid  carried  out  when  the  oxygen  pressure  was  released  from  the  bomb. 
Homogeneity  of  the  material  was  determined  by  duplicate 
acidimetric  titrations  of  each  of  eight  samples  randomly 
selected  from  the  bulk  of  the  material.  No  inhomogeneity  was  found  within  the  analytical  uncertainty.  These  titrations 
indicated  an  overall  purity  of  99.95  +  0.02  weight  percent. 
Confirmatory  analysis  for  fluorine  was  made  by  the  specific,  but  relatively  imprecise,  lead  chlorofluoride  gravimetric 
method.  Five  determinations  by  this  procedure  indicated  a  purity  of  100.1  +  0.2  weight  percent. 
Differential  scanning  calorimetry  indicated  a  purity  of  99.9  percent. 
detectable  impurities. 

Mass  spectrometric  examination  showed  no 

The  overall  direction  and  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  certification  were  performed  under  the 
chairmanship  of  J.  K.  Taylor. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  Standard  Reference 
Material  were  coordinated  through  the  Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials  by  T.  W.  Mears. 

Washington,  D.C.  20234 
January  12,  1982 
(Revision  of  Certificate 
dated  1/23/73)

. 

George  A.  Uriano,  Chief 
Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials 

