National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 2267 

 

 

 
Deuterated Levoglucosan in Ethyl Acetate 
 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is a solution of deuterated levoglucosan (1,6-anydro-beta-d-glucose-d7) in 
ethyl acetate.  This SRM is intended primarily for use as an internal standard or surrogate internal standard solution 
that  is  used  to  spike  both  the  unknown  sample  and  a  calibration  or  external  standard  solution  of  non-labeled 
levoglucosan.    A  unit  of  SRM  2267  consists  of  five  2-mL  ampoules,  each  containing  approximately  1.2  mL  of 
solution. 
 
Certified  Concentration  of  Deuterated  Levoglucosan:    The  certified  concentration  value  [1,2]  given  below  is 
based  on  results  obtained  from  the  gravimetric  preparation  of  this  solution  and  from  the  analytical  results 
determined  by  using  gas  chromatography.    A  NIST  certified  value  is  a  value  for  which  NIST  has  the  highest 
confidence in its accuracy in that all known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or accounted for by 
NIST. 

 

Deuterated Levoglucosan 

66.3 mg/kg ± 1.4 mg/kg 

 
The results are expressed as the certified value ± the expanded uncertainty. The certified value is the unweighted 
average of the concentration determined by gravimetric and chromatographic methods.  The expanded uncertainty, 
at  a  95 %  level  of  confidence,  is  calculated  as  U  =  kuc,  where  uc  is  a  combined  standard  uncertainty  calculated 
according to the ISO and NIST Guides [3] and k = 2 is the coverage factor.  The quantity uc represents, at the level 
of  one  standard  deviation,  the  combined  effects  of  the  uncertainty  due  to  purity  assessment  and  an allowance for 
differences between the concentration determined by gravimetric preparation and chromatographic measurements.   
 
Expiration  of  Certification:    The  certification  of  this  SRM  lot  is  valid  until  30  September  2016,  within  the 
measurement uncertainties specified, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with the instructions 
given in this certificate.  However, the certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or modified.  
NIST reserves the right to withdraw, amend, or extend this certification at any time.   
 
Maintenance  of  SRM  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If 
substantive technical changes occur that affect the certification before the expiration of this certificate, NIST will 
notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
The coordination of the technical measurements leading to the certification of this SRM was under the direction of 
M.M. Schantz and L.C. Sander of the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division. 
 
Consultation  on  the  statistical  design  of  the  experimental  work  and  evaluation  of  the  data  were  provided  by 
S.D. Leigh of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Partial funding support for the preparation and certification of this Standard Reference Material was provided by the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development, Human Exposure and Atmospheric 
Science Division, National Exposure Research Laboratory.  
 
The  support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Measurement 
Services Division. 

Gaithersburg, MD  20899  
Certificate Issue Date:  12 March 2007 

Stephen A. Wise, Chief 
Analytical Chemistry Division 
 
Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

SRM 2267 

Page 1 of 2 

Preparation and analytical measurements of the SRM were performed by B.A. Benner, Jr. and M.M. Schantz of the 
NIST Analytical Chemistry Division and M.P. Cronise and C.N. Fales of the Standard Reference Materials Group. 
 
NOTICE AND WARNING TO USERS 
 
Handling:  This material should be handled with care.  Use proper disposal methods. 
 
Storage:  Sealed ampoules, as received, should be stored in the dark at temperatures between 10 °C and 30 °C. 
 
Instructions  for  Use:    Sample  aliquots  for  analysis  should  be  withdrawn  at  20  °C  to  25  °C  immediately  after 
opening  the  ampoules  and  should  be  processed  without  delay  for  the  certified  value  to  be  valid  within  the  stated 
uncertainty.  Because  of  the  volatility  of  ethyl  acetate,  certified  values  are  not  applicable  to  material  stored  in 
ampoules that have been opened for more than 4 minutes, even if they are resealed. 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS 
 
The  deuterated  levoglucosan  used  in  the  preparation  of  this  SRM  was  obtained  from  a  commercial  source.    The 
solution was prepared at NIST by weighing and mixing the deuterated levoglucosan and ethyl acetate.  The weighed 
component was added to the ethyl acetate and mixed overnight.  The total mass of this solution was measured, and 
the concentration was calculated from this gravimetric procedure.   This gravimetric concentration was adjusted for 
the  purity  estimation  of  the  deuterated  levoglucosan,  which  was  determined  using  flame  ionization  capillary  gas 
chromatography  with  two  stationary  phases  of  different  polarities.    This  bulk  solution  was  then  chilled  to 
approximately –5 °C, and 1.2 mL aliquots were dispensed into 2-mL amber glass ampoules, which were then flame 
sealed. 
 
Aliquots  from  nine  ampoules  selected  using  a  stratified,  random  sampling  scheme  were  analyzed  in  duplicate  by 
using  capillary  gas  chromatography  with  mass  spectrometric  detection  (GC/MS)  in  the  electron impact ionization 
mode  and  a  non-polar  5 %  phenyl  methylpolysiloxane  phase  following  derivatization  using  N,O-bis-
(trimethylsilyl)trifluoroacetamide  (BSTFA)  catalyzed  with  1 %  trimethylchlorosilane  (TMCS)  [4].    The  internal 
standard  added  to  each  sample  for  quantification  purposes  was  non-labeled  levoglucosan  (CAS  #  498-07-7). 
Briefly, the levoglucosans were converted to their corresponding trimethylsilyl derivatives by adding 20 µL each of 
pyridine and a 1 % mixture of TMCS in BSTFA.  These sample mixtures were heated to 60 °C for 2 h, after which 
enough ethyl acetate was added to bring the final sample volume to approximately 1 mL.  The ethyl acetate solution 
was then analyzed by GC/MS.  Calibration solutions consisting of weighed amounts of the deuterated levoglucosan 
(adjusted for the purity estimation) and the internal standard compound in ethyl acetate were chromatographically 
analyzed to determine analyte response factors.  
 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  May,  W.;  Parris,  R.;  Beck,  C.;  Fassett,  J.;  Greenberg,  R.;  Guenther,  F.;  Kramer,  G.;  Wise,  S.;  Gills,  T.; 
Colbert, J.;  Gettings,  R.;  and  MacDonald,  B.;    Definitions  of  Terms  and  Modes  Used  at  NIST  for  Value-
Assignment  of  Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136,  U.S. 
Government Printing Office:  Washingtion, DC (2000). 

[2]  Taylor, B.N.; Guide for the Use of the International System of Units (SI); NIST Special Publication 811, U.S. 

Government Printing Office:  Washington, DC (1995). 

 [3]  ISO;  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in  Measurement;  ISBN  92-67-10188-9,  1st  ed.,  International 
Organization for Standardization:  Geneva, Switzerland (1993); see Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for 
Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results; NIST Technical Note 1297, U.S. 
Government Printing Office:  Washington, DC (1994).  

[4]  Larsen, R.K. III; Schantz, M.M.; Wise, S.A.; Determination of Levoglucosan in Particulate Matter Reference 

Materials; Aerosol Sci. Technol.; Vol. 40, pp. 781–787 (2006).  

’  (2006).

 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  certificate in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished by 
contacting the SRM Program at:  Telephone (301) 975-6776; Fax (301) 926-4751; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via 
the Internet at http://nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 2267 

Page 2 of 2 

