National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 2380 

 

 
Drugs of Abuse in Human Hair II 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  validating  methods  for  determining 
morphine (MOR),  codeine (COD),  6-monoacetylmorphine (MAM),  and  tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)  in  human 
hair  and  similar  materials.    This  SRM  can  also be used for quality assurance when assigning values to in-house 
control materials.  The SRM is a drug-free human hair material, to which drugs of abuse have been added.  A unit 
of SRM 2380 consists of one bottle containing approximately 100 mg of hair segments. 
 
Certified Mass Fraction Values:  The certified mass fraction values for the target compounds in SRM 2380 are 
provided in Table 1.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy 
in  that  all  known  or  suspected  sources  of  bias  have  been  investigated  or  taken  into  account [1].    The  certified 
concentration  values  for  each  level  are  based  on  the  agreement  of  results  from  gas  chromatography - mass 
spectrometry (GC-MS)  and  liquid  chromatography - mass  spectrometry (LC-MS).    Values  are  reported  on  an 
as-received basis in mass fraction units. 
 
Expiration  of  Certification:    The  certification  of  SRM 2380  is  valid,  within  the  measurement  uncertainty 
specified, until 01 January 2017, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with instructions given in 
this  certificate  (see  “Instructions  for  Storage  and  Use”).    However,  the  certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is 
damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance  of  SRM  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If 
substantive technical changes occur that affect the certification before the expiration of this certificate, NIST will 
notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
The overall direction and coordination of the analytical measurements leading to the certification of this SRM were 
performed by M.J. Welch of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division, and K.W. Phinney of the NIST Biomolecular 
Measurement Division. 
 
Certification  measurements  were  performed  by  J.L. Prendergast,  L.T. Sniegoski,  and  S.S-C. Tai  of  the  NIST 
Chemical Sciences Division.  Additional measurements were performed by M.M. Schantz of the NIST Chemical 
Sciences Division and B.E. Lang of the NIST Biosystems and Biomaterials Division. 
 
Statistical analysis was provided by N.-f. Zhang of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  07 December 2012 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

SRM 2380  

Page 1 of 3 

NOTICE AND WARNING TO USERS 
 
Warning:  For laboratory use only. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage:  The SRM should be stored under refrigeration at temperatures between 4 C and 8 C. 
 
Use:  A quantity of hair appropriate for a particular analysis should be withdrawn and weighed on an analytical 
balance  prior  to  extraction  and  analysis.    Particular  care  must  be  exercised  for  determinations  of  morphine  and 
monoacetylmorphine (MAM)  because  of  the  possible  conversion  of  significant  quantities  of  MAM  to  morphine 
during  sample  preparation.    These  effects  can  be  minimized  by  spiking  the  sample  with  isotope-labeled  internal 
standards at levels near those of the unlabeled analytes prior to extraction. 
 
SOURCE, PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
Preparation:    SRM 2380  is  human  hair  from  a  single  individual.    The  hair  was  manually  cut  into  short 
segments  and  then  soaked  for  17 days  in  equal  volumes  of  water  and  dimethylsulfoxide  containing  the  target 
analytes.  The hair was removed from the mother liquor, rinsed several times with methanol, and allowed to air 
dry. 
 
NIST Analyses For the Target Drugs of Abuse:  For each of the analytes, measurements from two independent 
methods based on GC-MS and LC-MS were used.  For the GC-MS method for the opiates [2], hair samples were 
spiked  with  deuterated  analogs  of  each  of  the  analytes  and  then  extracted  with  0.1 mol/L HCl  at  45 ºC  for  24 h.  
The extracts were neutralized and put through commercial solid-phase extraction cartridges designed for urine drug 
testing  following  the  manufacturer’s  directions.    After  the  eluants  were  collected  and  dried,  COD,  MOR,  and 
MAM were dissolved in N,O-bis(trimethylsilyl)acetamide and analyzed together.  For the GC-MS measurements 
of THC, the hair samples were treated with 1 mol/L NaOH and heated at 95 °C for 30 min.  The mixture was then 
acidified  to  pH 4–5  and  put  through  a  solid-phase  extraction  cartridge.    The  eluant  was  treated  with 
N,O-bis(trimethylsilyl)acetamide to derivatize the THC for GC-MS analysis.  For both methods, the GC-MS was 
equipped  with  a  30 m  low-polarity  GC  column  and  measurements  were  performed using electron ionization and 
selected ion monitoring.  For the LC-MS method for the opiates, hair samples were spiked with deuterated analogs 
of each of the analytes and extracted with 0.1 mol/L HCl at 45 ºC for 24 h.  The extracts were neutralized to pH 6.0 
and  put  through  solid-phase  extraction  cartridges  that  were  different  from  those  used  for  GC-MS.    No 
derivatization was necessary, and the three opiate compounds were measured together in a single run.  The LC was 
equipped  with  a  deactivated  C18 column,  and  compounds  were  eluted  using  a  gradient  mobile  phase  of  0.1 % 
(volume fraction) acetic acid in water and methanol.  For the LC-MS measurement of THC, the hair samples were 
treated with 1 mol/L NaOH and heated at 95 °C for 30 min.  After the pH of the samples was adjusted to pH 3–4, 
THC  was  extracted  with  hexane:ethyl  acetate (9:1,  volume  fractions).    This  extract  was  then  dried  and 
reconstituted in methanol for analysis by LC-MS.  This method used a different deactivated C18 column, but the 
mobile phase was the same as that used for the opiates.  The electrospray ionization conditions were optimized for 
each analyte.  For both GC-MS and LC-MS methods, three sets of samples were measured for all of the analytes.  
Each set consisted of two samples each from three bottles of hair.  Calibration standards were run before and after 
the samples, and a standard curve was generated by a least-squares fit of all of the standards measurements for a 
particular set. 
 
Homogeneity Assessment:  For the sample sizes used for the certification measurements (20 mg to 25 mg), there 
was  no  evidence  of  within-bottle  inhomogeneity.    There  also  was  no  correlation  between  fill  order  and 
concentrations measured for any of the analytes. 
 
Stability  Measurements:    Analyses  of  the  target  analytes  were  performed  using  the  GC-MS  and  LC-MS 
for  codeine,  morphine,  and 
approaches  previously  described. 
6-monoacetylmorphine were updated based upon the stability measurements. 
 
Certified Mass Fraction Values:  The uncertainty provided with each value is an expanded uncertainty about the 
mean  to  cover  the  measurand  with  approximately  95 %  confidence,  consistent  with  the  ISO  Guide  and  with  its 
                                                            

  The  certified  concentration  values 

(1)  Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental  procedure.    Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  National  Institute  of 
Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the 
purpose. 

SRM 2380  

Page 2 of 3 

Supplement 1 [3–7].  The expanded uncertainty is calculated as U = kuc, where uc is the combined uncertainty, and 
k  is  a  coverage  factor  corresponding  to  approximately  95 %  confidence  for  each  analyte [3].    For  the  certified 
values shown below, k = 2. 

 
Table 1.  Certified Concentration Values for Analytes in SRM 2380 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

Analyte 
 

Codeine 
Morphine 
6-Monoacetylmorphine 
Tetrahydrocannabinol 

 

Mass Fraction  
(ng/mg) 

8.80    0.39 
9.31    0.51 
2.10    0.26 
0.99    0.10 

 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G..;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.;  Gettings, R.;  MacDonald, B.;  Definitions  of  Terms  and  Modes  Used  at  NIST  for  Value-
Assignment  of  Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136, 
at 
Printing 
U.S. Government 
http://nist.gov/srm/publications.cfm (accessed Dec 2012). 

Gaithersburg, MD 

available 

(2000); 

Office, 

[3] 

[2]  Welch, M.J.; Sniegoski, L.T.; Allgood, C.C.; Habram, M.; Hair Analysis for Drugs of Abuse: Evaluation of 
Analytical  Methods,  Environmental  Issues,  and  Development  of  Reference  Materials;  J.  Anal.  Toxicol.; 
Vol. 17, pp. 389–398 (1993). 
JCGM 100:2008;  Evaluation  of  Measurement  Data  —  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in 
Measurement (ISO GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections); Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (2008); 
available 
(accessed 
Dec 2012); see also Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty 
of  NIST  Measurement  Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office: 
Washington, DC (1994); available at http://physics.nist.gov/Pubs/ (accessed Dec 2012). 
JCGM 101:2008;  Evaluation  of  measurement  data  –  Supplement  1  to  the  Guide  to  the  Expression  of 
in  Measurement  –  Propagation  of  Distributions  Using  a  Monte  Carlo  Method; 
Uncertainty 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_101_2008_E.pdf 
JCGM (2008); available at 
(accessed Dec 2012). 

http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf 

[4] 

at 

[5]  Rukhin, A.L.;  Weighted  Means  Statistics  in  Interlaboratory  Studies;  Metrologia,  Vol. 46,  pp. 323–

[6] 

[7] 

331 (2009). 
Schiller, S.B.;  Eberhardt, K.E.;  Combining  Data 
Spectrochim. Acta, Vol. 46B, pp. 1607–1613 (1991). 
Levenson, M.S.;  Banks, D.L.;  Eberhardt, K.R.;  Gill, L.M.;  Guthrie, W.F.;  Liu, H-k.;  Vangel, M.G.; 
Yen, J.H.;  Zhang, N.F.;  An  Approach  to  Combining  Results  from  Multiple  Methods  Motivated  by  the  ISO 
GUM; J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., Vol. 105, pp. 571–579 (2000). 

from  Independent  Chemical  Analysis  Methods; 

 
 
 
 
 
Certificate Revision History:  07 December 2012 (This revision contains updated certified mass fraction values for codeine, morphine, and 
6-monoacetylmorphine, an extension of the certification period, and editorial changes); 29 October 2002 (Original certificate issue date).  
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
(301) 948-3730; 
telephone 
accomplished  by  contacting 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

fax 

 

SRM 2380  

Page 3 of 3 

