National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material 2383a 
 
Baby Food Composite 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended primarily for validation of methods for determining proximates, 
calories, sugars, carotenoids, and elements in food matrices.  This SRM can also be used for quality assurance when 
assigning values to in-house control materials.  The baby food composite is a mixture of fruits, vegetables, macaroni, 
rice  flour,  and  milk  powder.    A  unit  of  SRM 2383a  consists  of  four  jars,  each  containing  approximately  70 g  of 
material. 
 
Certified  Mass  Fraction  Values:    Certified  mass  fraction  values  for  carotenoids  and  elements  in  SRM 2383a, 
reported on an as-received basis, are provided in Tables 1 and 2.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST 
has the highest confidence in its accuracy in that all known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or 
taken  into  account [1].    Analyses  for  value  assignment  were  performed  by  NIST  and  collaborating  laboratories.  
Certified values were calculated as the unweighted mean of the mean values from NIST methods and the median of 
the  mean  of  results  provided  by  collaborating  laboratories,  where  appropriate.    The  associated  uncertainties  are 
expressed at an approximately 95 % level of confidence [2–4]. 
 
Reference Mass Fraction Values:  Reference mass fraction values for additional analytes in SRM 2383a, reported 
on an as-received basis, are provided in Tables 3 through 6.  A NIST reference value is a noncertified value that is the 
best  estimate  of  the  true  value  based  on  available  data;  however,  the  value  does  not  meet  the  NIST  criteria  for 
certification [1]  and  is  provided  with  an  uncertainty  that  may  reflect  only  measurement  reproducibility,  may  not 
include all sources of uncertainty, or may reflect a lack of sufficient statistical agreement among multiple analytical 
methods.    The  reference  mass  fraction  values  were  derived  from  results  reported  by  NIST  and/or  collaborating 
laboratories. 
 
Information Mass Fraction Values:  Information mass fraction values for several elements in SRM 2383a, reported 
on an as-received basis, are provided in Table 7.  A NIST information value is a value that may be of interest to the 
SRM user, but insufficient information is available to assess the uncertainty associated with the value, and therefore 
no uncertainty is provided [1].  Information values may not be used to establish metrological traceability. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2383a is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until  01 January 2029,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  instructions  given  in  this 
certificate (see “Instructions for Storage and Use”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, 
or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination of the technical measurements leading to the certification of this SRM was performed by M.M. Phillips 
and L.J. Wood of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division, K.E. Sharpless of the NIST Special Programs Office, and 
S. Ehling of the Grocery Manufacturers Association (GMA, Washington, DC). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  28 August 2019 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page  

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

 

SRM 2383a 

Page 1 of 8 

 

Mills, 

Steins 

General 

Eurofins 

(Vejen, Denmark); 

Analyses at NIST were performed by C. Boonyakong, C. Bryan, W.C. Davis, R. Oflaz, D.J. O’Kelly, T.O. Okumu, 
Y. Nuevo Ordóñez, R.L. Paul, J.B. Thomas, B.E. Tomlin, and L.J. Wood of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Analysts at the following laboratories performed measurements that contributed to the value assignment of nutrients 
in SRM 2383a Baby Food Composite as part of the GMA Food Industry Analytical Chemists Committee (FIACC) 
interlaboratory  comparison  exercise  and  as  part  of  an  interlaboratory  comparison  exercise  coordinated  by  NIST:  
Campbell  Soup  Company  (Camden, NJ);  ConAgra  Foods  Analytical  Laboratory  (Omaha, NE);  Covance 
Laboratories (Madison, WI);  Del  Monte 
Foods (Walnut  Creek, CA);  Eurofins  Central  Analytical 
Laboratories (Metairie, LA);  Eurofins  Nutritional  Analysis  Center,  Inc. (Des  Moines, IA);  Eurofins  Strasburger  & 
Siegel (Hanover, MD); 
Inc./Medallion 
Laboratories (Minneapolis, MN);  Hormel  Foods  Corporation (Austin, MN);  Krueger  Food  Labs (Billerica, MA); 
Land  O’  Lakes (Arden  Hills, MN);  Merieux  NutriSciences (Crete, IL);  Nestlé  QA  Center (Dublin, OH);  Silliker, 
JR  Laboratories (Burnbury, BC,  Canada);  The  National  Food 
Inc. (Chicago  Heights, IL);  Silliker 
Laboratory (Livermore, CA); and The Schwan Food Company (Salina, KS). 
 
Statistical analysis was provided by J.H. Yen of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
NOTICE TO USERS 
 
SRM 2383a IS INTENDED FOR RESEARCH USE, NOT FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage:  The SRM should be stored under refrigeration at a temperature between 2 °C and 8 °C, in the dark, and in 
the original sealed jars.  The certification does not apply to contents of previously opened jars that have been stored 
for more than one day as the stability of all analytes beyond this period has not been investigated. 
 
Use:  Before use, the contents of the jar should be mixed thoroughly.  The following masses used for NIST analyses 
should be used as the minimum sample size to ensure valid results: 1.5 g for carotenoids; 1 g to 3.5 g for elements 
(see Analytical Approach for Determination of Elements below).  Results obtained in analyses should include their 
own estimates of uncertainty and can be compared to the certified and reference values using procedures described in 
reference 5. 
 
SOURCE, PREPARATION, AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
Source and Preparation:  SRM 2383a is a mixture of the following ingredients (in order of decreasing mass):  water, 
orange juice concentrate, corn, rice flour, papaya puree, spinach, macaroni, carrots, tomato paste, and non-fat milk 
powder.    This  material  is  different  from  its  predecessor,  SRM 2383,  in  that  infant  formula  was  not  added  to  the 
material.  Therefore, it contains no preformed vitamin A nor other constituents that would be present in a fortified 
food product. 
 
Analytical Approach for Determination of Carotenoids:  Value assignment of the mass fractions of the carotenoids 
in  SRM 2383a  was  based  on  the  combination  of  measurements  from  two  analytical  methods  at  NIST  and  results 
obtained  by  collaborating  laboratories,  where  available.    NIST  provided  measurements  by  using  liquid 
spectrometric 
chromatography  methods  with  absorbance  detection 
detection (LC-MS). 
 
NIST  Analyses  for  Carotenoids  Using  LC-Absorbance:    Lutein,  zeaxanthin,  and  β-carotene  were  measured  by 
LC-absorbance  in  duplicate  1.5 g  test  portions  taken  from  each  of  ten  jars.    An  aliquot  of  internal  standard, 
trans-β-apo-10’-carotenal oxime in ethanol containing butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT) as an antioxidant, was added 
to each sample.  The sample was suspended in approximately 6 mL of stabilized tetrahydrofuran:methanol (50:50, 
volume fraction) by ultrasonic mixing for 1 min.  The sample was saponified by addition of methanolic potassium 
hydroxide and heated at 40 °C for 1 h with constant stirring.  The pH of the sample was adjusted to approximately 
pH 7 using glacial acetic acid and the analytes extracted into at least three 15-mL portions of hexane:petroleum ether 
(50:50 volume fraction) following addition of 10 mL of aqueous sodium chloride solution.  Hexane:petroleum ether 

(LC-absorbance)  and  with  mass 

                                                           

ately  specify  the
(1)  Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
SRM 2383a 

Page 2 of 8 

two 

jars. 

test  portions 

  Aliquots  of 

taken  from  each  of  eight 

phases  were  combined  and  washed  with  water  prior  to  evaporation  under  a  stream  of  nitrogen.    The  residue  was 
redissolved in 0.5 mL of ethyl acetate and injected for LC-absorbance analysis using a C18 column.  Carotenoids were 
separated  using  a  gradient  method  consisting  of  acetonitrile/methanol/ethyl  acetate  each  containing  0.05 % 
triethylamine.    The  methanol  phase  also  contained  0.5  mol/L  ammonium  acetate.    Elution  of  carotenoids  was 
monitored using absorbance at 450 nm.  Calibrants were prepared gravimetrically, at levels intended to approximate 
the  levels  of  the  carotenoids  in  the  SRM,  and  concentrations  were  assigned  based  on  spectrophotometric  purity 
evaluation.  A single internal standard solution was used for the calibrants and samples. 
 
NIST  Analyses  for  Carotenoids  Using  LC-MS:    Lutein,  zeaxanthin,  and  β-carotene  were  measured  by  LC-MS  in 
internal  standards, 
duplicate  2.5 g 
trans-β-apo-10’-carotenal oxime and d6-β-carotene, each in ethanol containing butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT) as an 
antioxidant, were added to each sample.  Approximately 0.5 g of calcium carbonate was added and the sample was 
suspended in approximately 100 mL of hexane:petroleum ether (50:50, volume fraction) by vortex mixing for 1 min.  
The mixture was vacuum filtered and the filtrate rinsed with tetrahydrofuran:methanol (50:50, volume fraction) until 
all  orange  color  was  removed  from  the  solids.    The  solids  were  then  combined  with  an  aqueous  sodium  chloride 
solution and the analytes extracted into diethyl ether:petroleum ether (50:50, volume fraction).  The organic fraction 
was washed with water prior to evaporation to 0.5 mL under a stream of nitrogen.  The residue was redissolved in 
3.5 mL of ethanol.  The ethanol extract was saponified for 30 min at room temperature by addition of methanolic 
potassium hydroxide containing pyrogallol.  The pH of the sample was adjusted to approximately pH 7 using ascorbic 
acid and the analytes extracted into diethyl ether:petroleum ether (50:50, volume fraction).  The organic phase was 
washed with water prior to evaporation under a stream of nitrogen.  The residue was redissolved in 1 mL of ethanol 
and injected for LC-MS analysis using a C30 column.  Carotenoids were separated using a gradient method consisting 
of water and acetone.  Elution of carotenoids was monitored using atmospheric pressure photoionization and mass 
spectrometric detection in selected ion monitoring (SIM) mode using the following ions: m/z 551 for lutein; m/z 569 
for zeaxanthin; m/z 417 for trans-β-apo-10’-carotenal oxime; m/z 537.4 for β-carotene; m/z 543.4 for d6-β-carotene.  
Calibrants were prepared gravimetrically, at levels intended to approximate the levels of the carotenoids in the SRM, 
and concentrations were assigned based on spectrophotometric purity evaluation.  A single internal standard solution 
was used for the calibrants and samples. 
 
Analytical Approach for Determination of Elements:  Value assignment of the mass fractions of the elements in 
SRM 2383a was based on the combination of measurements from at least two different analytical methods at NIST or 
a single NIST result and results obtained by collaborating laboratories, where available.  NIST provided measurements 
by  using  inductively  coupled  plasma  optical  emission  spectrometry (ICP-OES),  inductively  coupled  plasma  mass 
spectrometry (ICP-MS),  instrumental  neutron  activation  analysis (INAA),  and  radiochemical  neutron  activation 
analysis (RNAA). 
 
NIST Analyses for Ba, Ca, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, I, K, Mg, Mn, Mo, Ni, P, Na, Sr, Sn, and Zn by ICP-OES and/or ICP-MS:  
Mass  fractions  of  calcium,  copper,  iron,  magnesium,  manganese,  phosphorus,  potassium,  sodium,  and  zinc  were 
determined by ICP-OES from duplicate 3.5 g test portions taken from each of ten jars of SRM 2383a.  Samples were 
digested  in  a  nitric  acid/hydrofluoric  acid  mixture  in  open  beakers  on  a  hotplate.    For  the  determination  of  mass 
fractions of barium and strontium by ICP-OES and the determination of barium, chromium, cobalt, molybdenum, 
nickel, strontium, and tin by ICP-MS, duplicate 1.5 g test portions were taken from each of ten jars of SRM 2383a 
and  were  digested  in  a  nitric  acid/hydrofluoric  acid  mixture  in  closed  vessels  in  a  microwave  oven.    For  the 
determination of iodine by ICP-MS, single 1 g test portions were taken from six jars of SRM 2383a and from four 
other jars several months later.  Samples were digested in aqueous tetramethylammonium hydroxide in closed vessels 
in a microwave oven.  Quantitation was based on the method of standard additions using the SRM 3100 series single 
element standard solutions. 
 
NIST Analyses for Co, Cr, Se, and Zn by INAA:  For the determination of the mass fractions of chromium, cobalt, 
selenium, and zinc by INAA, material in ten jars of SRM 2383a was freeze dried and pulverized, and individual disks 
were prepared from 0.2 g test portions taken from the resulting powder.  Standards were prepared from compounds of 
known purity.  Samples, standards, and controls were packaged individually in clean polyethylene bags and irradiated 
individually at 20 MW for 8 h.  Nuclides were counted for 8 h after decays of more than 120 d for chromium and 
180 d for cobalt, selenium, and zinc.  The following gamma-ray energies were used in the INAA analyses:  1173 keV 
and  1332 keV  for  the  determination  of  cobalt,  320 keV  for  chromium,  136 keV  and  265 keV  for  selenium,  and 
1115 keV for zinc. 
 
NIST Analyses for As by RNAA:  For the determination of the mass fraction of arsenic by RNAA, material in ten jars 
of SRM 2383a was freeze dried and pulverized, and individual disks were prepared from 0.2 g test portions taken 
from the resulting powder.  Standards were prepared from SRM 3103a Arsenic (As) Standard Solution.  Samples, 
standards, and controls were packaged individually in clean polyethylene bags and irradiated individually at 20 MW 
for 8 h.  Samples were combined with 77As prior to chemical separation.  Samples were dissolved in a mixture of nitric 

SRM 2383a 

Page 3 of 8 

and perchloric acids, and As was separated from the matrix as described in reference 6.  The 559 keV line from decay 
of 76As was used for quantitation.  The 239 keV line from decay of 77As was evaluated for yield determination. 
 
Collaborating Laboratories’ Analyses:  The GMA FIACC laboratories were asked to use their usual methods to 
make single measurements on test portions taken from each of two jars of SRM 2383a.  The laboratories participating 
in the NIST exercise were asked to make duplicate measurements on each of two days.  Because of the variability 
among data provided by laboratories participating in an interlaboratory comparison exercise, the median of the means 
is used.  Collaborating laboratories’ data alone were used to assign reference values for proximates, sugars, and amino 
acids. 
 
Homogeneity Assessment:  The homogeneity of carotenoids and elements was assessed at NIST using the methods 
and test portion sizes described above; analysis of variance did not show statistically significant heterogeneity.  All 
analytes have been treated as though they are homogeneously distributed in the material although the homogeneity of 
the other analytes that were measured by collaborating laboratories (e.g., proximates) was not assessed. 
 
Value Assignment:  For calculation of assigned values for analytes that were measured only by NIST, the mean of 
the mean values from NIST results were used.  For calculation of assigned values for analytes that were measured 
only by the collaborating laboratories, the median of the laboratory means was used.  For carotenoids and elements 
that  were  measured by  NIST  and  collaborating  laboratories,  the  median  of  the  individual  collaborating  laboratory 
means and the mean of the individual sets of NIST data were averaged, as appropriate. 
 
Certified Mass Fraction Values for Carotenoids:  Each certified mass fraction value, reported on an as-received 
basis, is the mean from the combination of means of NIST data sets and the median of the mean results provided by 
collaborating  laboratories.    Values  are  expressed  as  x ± U95%(x),  where  x  is  the  certified  value  and  U95%(x)  is  the 
expanded uncertainty of the certified value.  The true value of the analyte lies within the interval x ± U95%(x) with 
95 % confidence.  To propagate this uncertainty, treat the certified value as a normally distributed random variable 
with mean x and standard deviation U95%(x)/2 [2-4].  The measurand is the total mass fraction of each carotenoid in 
baby food composite as listed in Table 1 on an as-received basis.  Metrological traceability is to the SI measurement 
unit for chemical mass fraction, expressed as milligrams per kilogram through the molar absorptivity of the compound. 
 

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fraction Values for Carotenoids in SRM 2383a 

 

Analyte 

Total Lutein(a,b) 
Total Zeaxanthin(a,b,c)

 

(a) Collaborating laboratories 
(b) NIST LC-absorbance 
(c)  NIST LC-MS 
 

 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

0.89  ±  0.20 
0.67  ±  0.11 

 
 

SRM 2383a 

Page 4 of 8 

Certified Mass Fraction Values for Elements:  Each certified mass fraction value, reported on an as-received basis, 
is  the  mean  from  the  combination  of  means  of  NIST  data  sets  and  the  median  of  the  mean  results  provided  by 
collaborating laboratories, where appropriate.  Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the certified value and 
U95%(x)  is  the  expanded  uncertainty  of  the  certified  value.    The  true  value  of  the  analyte  lies  within  the  interval 
x ± U95%(x) with 95 % confidence.  To propagate this uncertainty, treat the certified value as a normally distributed 
random variable with mean x and standard deviation U95%(x)/2 [2-4].  The measurand is the total mass fraction of each 
element in baby food composite as listed in Table 2 on an as-received basis.  Metrological traceability is to the SI 
measurement unit for chemical mass fraction, expressed as milligrams per kilogram. 
 

Table 2.  Certified Mass Fraction Values for Elements in SRM 2383a 

 

 

Analyte 

Barium (Ba)(a,b) 
Calcium (Ca)(a,c) 
Cobalt (Co)(b,d) 
Copper (Cu)(a,c) 
Iron (Fe)(a,c) 
Magnesium (Mg)(a,c) 
Manganese (Mn)(a,c) 
Phosphorus (P)(a,c) 
Potassium (K)(a,c) 
Sodium (Na)(a,c) 
Strontium (Sr)(a,b) 
Zinc (Zn)(a,c,d) 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

342.6 

0.020 
0.278  ± 
5.0 
± 
0.005 
0.048  ± 
0.082 
0.758  ± 
0.51 
4.42  ± 
4.0 
± 
0.064 
0.963  ± 
± 
11 
±  220 
29 
± 
0.047 
4.445  ± 
0.18 
2.22  ± 

212.2 

453 
2910 
195 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(a) NIST ICP-OES 
(b) NIST ICP-MS 
(c) Collaborating laboratories 
(d) NIST INAA 
 
 
Reference  Mass  Fraction  Values  for  trans-β-Carotene  and  Tocopherol:    Each  reference  mass  fraction  value, 
reported on an as-received basis, is the mean from the combination of means of NIST data sets and the median of the 
mean results provided by collaborating laboratories, where appropriate.  Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x 
is the reference value and U95%(x) is the expanded uncertainty of the value.  The method-specific value of the analyte 
lies within the interval x ± U95%(x) with about a 95 % confidence [2-4].  The measurand is the mass fraction for each 
analyte listed in Table 3 on an as-received basis as determined by the methods indicated.  Metrological traceability is 
to the measurement processes and standards used by NIST and collaborating laboratories. 
 

Table 3.  Reference Mass Fraction Values for Additional Analytes in SRM 2383a 

Analyte 

Total α-Tocopherol(a) 
trans-β-Carotene(a,b,c)

 

(a) Collaborating laboratories 
(b) NIST LC-absorbance 
(c)  NIST ID-LC-MS 
 
 

 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

5.4 
3.1 

±  1.4 
±  1.1 

 
 

SRM 2383a 

Page 5 of 8 

Reference Mass Fraction Values for Elements:  Each reference mass fraction value, reported on an as-received 
basis, is the mean of the results of a single NIST data set.  Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the reference 
value and U95%(x) is the expanded uncertainty of the value.  The method-specific value of the analyte lies within the 
interval x ± U95%(x) with about a 95 % confidence [2-4].  The measurand is the mass fraction for each element listed 
in  Table 4  as  determined  by  the  methods  indicated.    Metrological  traceability  is  to  the  SI  measurement  unit  for 
chemical mass fraction, expressed as milligrams per kilogram or micrograms per kilogram, as realized by the methods 
used. 
 

Table 4.  Reference Mass Fractions for Elements in SRM 2383a 

Analyte 

Iodine (I)(a) 
Tin (Sn)(a) 
 
 

Selenium (Se)(b) 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

0.0737  ±  0.0083 
0.361  ±  0.019 

Mass Fraction 
(µg/kg) 
0.028  ±  0.001 

 
 
 

 

(a) NIST ICP-MS 
(b) NIST INAA 
 
 
Reference  Values  for  Proximates,  Sugars,  and  Calories:    Each  reference  mass  fraction  value,  reported  on  an 
as-received basis, is the median of the mean values provided by collaborating laboratories.  Values are expressed as 
x ± U95%(x), where x is the estimated value and U95%(x) is the expanded uncertainty of the value.  The method-specific 
value of the analyte lies within the interval x ± U95%(x) with about a 95 % confidence [2-4].  For proximates and sugars, 
the measurands are the mass fractions of each analyte listed in Table 5, as determined by the methods indicated.  For 
calories, the measurand is the caloric content listed in Table 5, as determined by the method indicated.  Metrological 
traceability is to the measurement processes and standards used by collaborating laboratories. 
 

Table 5.  Reference Mass Fraction Values for Proximates, Sugars, and Calories in SRM 2383a 

Analyte 

Solids 
Ash 
Protein 
Carbohydrates 
Total Fat (as Sum of Fatty Acids as Triglycerides) 
Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids (as Free Fatty Acids) 
Saturated Fatty Acids (as Free Fatty Acids) 
Total Sugars 
Sucrose 
Glucose 
Fructose 
Lactose 

 

Calories(a) 

Mass Fraction 
(g/100 g) 

22.45  ±  0.68 
0.705  ±  0.021 
1.96  ±  0.06 
19.41  ±  0.70 
0.29  ±  0.20 
0.122  ±  0.077 
0.072  ±  0.035 
12.05  ±  0.50 
3.57  ±  0.12 
3.80  ±  0.11 
3.96  ±  0.09 
0.50  ±  0.10 
Energy 
(kcal per 100 g) 

89.0 

±  3.5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

(a)  The reference value for calories is the median of lab mean caloric calculations from the interlaboratory comparison exercise.  If 
the  mean  proximate  values  are  used  for  calculation,  with  caloric  equivalents  of  9,  4,  and  4  for  fat  (total),  protein,  and 
carbohydrate, respectively, the mean caloric content is 88.1 kcal/100 g. 

 

SRM 2383a 

Page 6 of 8 

 

 

 

Reference Mass Fraction Values for Amino Acids:  Each reference mass fraction value, reported on an as-received 
basis,  is  the  median  of  the  mean  results  provided  by  collaborating  laboratories,  using  either  LC-fluorescence  or 
LC-absorbance.    Values  are  expressed  as  x ± U95%(x),  where  x  is  the  reference  value  and  U95%(x)  is  the  expanded 
uncertainty of the value at a confidence level of approximately 95 %.  The measurand is the mass fraction for each 
amino acid listed in Table 6 as determined by the method indicated.  Metrological traceability is to the measurement 
processes and standards used by collaborating laboratories. 
 

Table 6.  Reference Mass Fraction Values for Amino Acids in SRM 2383a 

Jes  for  Am

 

 

 

Alanine 
Arginine 
Aspartic Acid 
Cystine 
Histidine 
Phenylalanine 
Tyrosine 
Valine 

Mass Fraction 
(g/100 g) 

0.0734  ±  0.0084 
0.126  ±  0.022 
0.1993  ±  0.0063 
0.0188  ±  0.0068 
0.0545  ±  0.0038 
0.0236  ±  0.0073 
0.0452  ±  0.0054 
0.070  ±  0.012 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Information Mass Fraction Values for Elements:  Each information mass fraction value (except for chromium) is 
the mean result of a NIST analysis using a single method.  The chromium value is the mean from two sets of NIST 
results.  No uncertainty is provided because there is insufficient information available for its assessment. 
 

Table 7.  Information Mass Fraction Values for Elements in SRM 2383a 

Analyte 

Chromium (Cr)(a,b) 
Molybdenum (Mo)(b) 
Nickel (Ni)(b) 
Arsenic (As)(c) 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

0.2 
0.06 
0.2 
0.003 

(a) NIST INAA 
(b) NIST ICP-MS 
(c) NIST RNAA 
 
 

 

SRM 2383a 

Page 7 of 8 

REFERENCES 

[2] 

 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of 
Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136  (2000);  available  at 
https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/srm/SP260-136.PDF (accessed Aug 2019). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(ISO  GUM  1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology  (2008);  available  at 
https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Aug 2019);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
https://www.nist.gov/pml/nist-technical-note-1297 (accessed Aug 2019). 
JCGM 101:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data – Supplement 1 to the Guide to Expression of Uncertainty 
in  Measurement;  Propagation  of  Distributions  Using  a  Monte  Carlo  Method;  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in 
Metrology;  International  Bureau  of  Weights  and  Measures (BIPM),  Sèvres, France  (2008);  available  at 
https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_101_2008_E.pdf (accessed Aug 2019). 
[4]  Efron, B.; Tibshirani, R.J.; An Introduction to the Bootstrap; Chapman & Hall, London, UK (1993). 
Dietary  Supplements 
[5]  Sharpless, K.E.; Duewer, D.L.; Standard Reference Materials for Analysis of Dietary Supplements; J. AOAC 

[3] 

Int., Vol. 91, pp. 1298–1302 (2008). 

[6]  Paul, R.L.; Determination of Arsenic in Food and Dietary Supplement Standard Reference Materials by Neutron 

Activation Analysis; Anal. Chem., Vol. 83, pp. 152-156 (2011). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certificate Revision History:  28 August 2019 [Addition of reference values for total fat (as the sum of fatty acids as triglycerides), polyunsaturated 
fatty acids, saturated fatty acids, amino acids, and α-tocopherol; correction of units for selenium value from mg/kg to µg/kg; removal of values for 
water-soluble vitamins, total lycopene, trans-lycopene, α-carotene, β-carotene, 9-cis-β-carotene, β-cryptoxanthin, and total dietary fiber; editorial 
ditorial  changes); 
changes]; 21 July 2015 (Addition of values for carotenoids; clarification and addition of footnotes for water-soluble vitamins; editorial changes); 
18 October 2012 (Original certificate date). 
  
 
 
 
 
This  can  be 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program  at:    telephone  (301)  975-2200;  fax  (301)  948-3730;  e-mail 
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 

  

possession  is  current. 

rotenoids 

 

SRM 2383a 

Page 8 of 8 

