a  ‘  National  Institute  of  Standards  &  Cechnologu 

at 

Ny 

a g 
a 

* 

S$ 
% 
*% 2 

 

 

Certificate  of  Analusis

Standard Reference Material® 2569 

 
Lead Paint Films for Children’s Products 

 
This Standard Reference  Material (SRM)  is intended for use in  the evaluation of  lead in paint  on  films or similar 
matrices using non-destructive, instrumental methods of analysis.  SRM 2569 consists of three different paint films 
each containing a specified amount of lead (Pb) and each supported on polyester sheet.  SRM 2569 is not intended 
for use in test method calibration for thickness and density.  A unit of SRM 2569 consists of three coupons of paint 
on polyester and five coupons of uncoated polyester.  The coupons are approximately 73 mm long by 52 mm wide.  
The paint films are cured lacquer having a specified thickness in the range of 20 µm to 45 µm. 
 
Certified Values:  Certified values for amount of Pb as mass fraction in the paint film, mass of Pb per unit area of 
paint film, and paint film thickness of the three coated components of SRM 2569 are reported in Table 1 [1].  Value 
assignment categories are based on the definitions of terms and  modes  used at NIST for certification of  chemical 
reference materials [2].  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy, 
in that all known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated and taken into account.  A certified value is the 
present  best  estimate  of  the  true  value  based  on  the  results  of  analyses  performed  at  NIST  and  collaborating 
laboratories. 
 
Reference  Values:    Reference  values  for  paint  film  density  are  reported  in  Table 2.    Reference  values  are 
non-certified values that are the best estimates of the true values; however, the values do not meet the NIST criteria 
for certification and are provided with associated uncertainties that may not include all sources of uncertainty [2]. 
 
Information  Value:    An  information  value  for  the  nominal  thickness  of  the  polyester  sheet  supporting  the  paint 
films is reported in Table 3.  An information value is considered a value that will be of interest to the SRM user, but 
insufficient information is available to assess the uncertainty associated with the value. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2569 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until  16 August 2021,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this 
certificate (see “Instructions for Handling, Storage, and Use”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance  of  SRM  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If 
substantive  technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  the  certificate,  NIST  will 
notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  for  certification  of  SRM 2569  was  performed  by  J.R. Sieber  of  the 
NIST Analytical Chemistry Division. 
 
Measurements  for  homogeneity  testing  and  value  assignment  of  SRM 2569  were  performed  by  S.E. Long, 
A.F. Marlow, J.L. Molloy, K.E. Murphy, and J.R. Sieber of the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division; D. Cobb of the 
U.S.  Consumer  Product  Safety  Commission (CPSC),  Rockville, MD,  and  M. Van de Mark  of  Rolla  Coatings, 
Rolla, MO.  Additional homogeneity measurements were performed by Z. Chen, D. Li, and A. Vershinin of X-Ray 
Optical  Systems,  East  Greenbush, NY  and  by  K. McIntosh  at  the  New  York  State  Department  of  Health, 
Albany, NY. 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  17 May 2012 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Stephen A. Wise, Chief 
Analytical Chemistry Division 
 
Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

SRM 2569 

 

Page 1 of 5 

Statistical consultation for the value assignment of SRM 2569 was provided by S.D. Leigh and A.L. Rukhin of the 
NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Measurement  Services 
Division. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
The following instructions cover the use, handling, and storage of SRM 2569.  Further explanations of the properties 
of  this  material  and  its  uses  are  provided  in  “A  Guide  to  Using  SRM 2569  to  Validate  Analytical  Methods” [3].  
Each  coupon  of  SRM 2569  is  labeled  on  the  side  opposite  to  the  paint  coating  using  a  small,  self-adhesive  label.  
The  paint  film  is  certified  across  the  entire  coupon  area;  however,  measurements  must  not  be  made  at  the  area 
behind the label.  The coupons are flexible and may be curved to conform to a cylinder ≥1 cm diameter.  To use the 
SRM to simulate measurement of a single layer of paint on a plastic substrate, measure the side of a coupon opposite 
to  the  labeled  side.    For  determinations  of  Pb,  the  coupons  were  designed  to  provide  at  least  four  unique 
measurement  locations  for  X-ray  spectrometers  viewing  an  area  of  1 cm2.    Larger  and  smaller  areas  may  be 
measured.    The  recommended  minimum  measurement  area  is  0.75 mm2.    Use  of  a  viewing  area  <1 cm2  requires 
measuring three or more separate locations and calculating the median of the results.  A useful approximation of the 
standard uncertainty of the median is the standard deviation of the mean multiplied by 1.25 [4]. 
 
Level 2 Heterogeneity:  The Level 2 coupons contain regions roughly spherical and approximately 50 µm diameter 
and  smaller  with  high  Pb concentrations  that  are  scattered  randomly  across  the  surface  of  the  coupon.    The 
recommended  minimum  measurement  area  and  the  requirement  to  calculate  the  median  of  three  or  more 
measurements serve to ensure that the spatial heterogeneity caused by these regions does not influence measurement 
accuracy.  In the event that one measurement out of three produces a result greater than twice the median of three 
measurements, the high value should be replaced by a new measurement of a different location.  See reference 3 for 
additional information. 
 
Store the SRM in a cool, dry location, preferably in its original container.  When handling coupons, wear gloves to 
prevent contamination by body oils and moisture.  Avoid exposure to light during storage.  In the normal course of 
handling  a  coupon,  it  may  become  contaminated  with  dust,  dirt,  or  oil.   If  it  is  necessary  to  clean  a  coupon,  first 
place it on a soft cloth on a smooth, flat surface.  Use a clean, dry, soft cloth to gently brush dust or dirt from the 
film.  A gentle stream of air from a clean supply will work also.  Do not blow from the mouth because this results in 
moisture and oils being directed at the coupon.   To remove oily residues,  use a clean  soft cloth to  gently rub the 
surface until the oil is no longer visible.  Do not use alcohol or organic solvents because they will destroy the paint.  
Frequent cleaning will shorten the useful life of the paint layer. 
 
Care  must  be  taken  to  avoid  damage  to  the  paint  film  when  using  a  procedure  that  requires  direct  contact  of 
equipment  with  the  paint  surface.    SRM 2569  paint  films  are  not  protected  by  a  clear  coating  layer.    Physical 
abrasion of the coupons’ surfaces must be avoided.  Do not fold or crease the material.  Do not cut coupons because 
cutting results in chipping of the paint at the cut edge that worsens with repeated handling.  The presence of loose 
flakes  of  paint,  however  small,  in  a  measured  area  will  cause  biased  results.    Do  not  measure  areas  that  include 
visible voids or cracks in the green coating. 
 
Five coupons of uncoated polyester are provided to enable users to simulate paint on thicker polymer substrates by 
stacking one or more uncoated coupons beneath a coated coupon, and measuring the coated side.  Measurements of 
paint layers hidden beneath a layer of polymer  may be simulated by measuring Pb through the uncoated coupons.  
Stacked coupons must be in close contact to each other.  A single coupon of the supplied polyester will attenuate Pb 
L-series  X rays  by  approximately  3 %  to  5 %  for  measurements  made  normal  to  the  surface.    Cl K-series  X rays 
from the paint will be attenuated approximately 95 % by a sheet of the polyester substrate.  Pb M-series X rays will 
be  difficult  to  detect  when  measuring  the  substrate  side  of  a  Pb-containing  coupon  because  the  polyester  absorbs 
approximately 99 % of Pb M-series X rays passing into it from the paint. 
 
Exposure  to  X rays  from  low-power  sources,  including  sources  used  in  handheld  spectrometers,  small  beam 
semi-monochromatic sources, and secondary target sources, can be made repeatedly without noticeable damage to 
the  lacquer.    However,  exposure  to  X rays  from  high-power  sources,  such  as  direct  irradiation  from  side-  and 
end-window  X-ray  tubes  operated  at  0.5 kW  and  higher,  will  result  in  observable  darkening  of  the  paint  and 
polyester.  Experience has shown that  10 exposures of a single location to a  high-power source for  600 s does not 
change the  measured Pb count rates  for  L-series and M-series lines.   Additional exposures are  not recommended.  

SRM 2569 

 

Page 2 of 5 

performed 

at  NIST 

Prolonged  exposure  (>30 min)  to  a  3 kW  Rh  tube  source  caused  damage  including  substantial  blackening  and 
flaking of the paint film. 
 
SOURCE, PREPARATION, AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
The  material  for  SRM 2569  was  created  for  NIST  by  Rolla  Coatings  by  applying  specially  formulated  lacquer 
compositions  to  cleaned,  uncoated  polyester  panels  (Leneta  Corp.,  Mahwah, NJ,  cat.  no. P300-7C)  using  an 
automated  draw  down  technique.    Lead  was  added  to  the  lacquer  as  lead  2-ethylhexanoate.    The  lacquers  also 
contain  chlorinated  dye  to  impart  the  green  color  and  to  enhance  X-ray  contrast  between  the  coating  and  the 
polyester substrate.  For Level 1 and Level 2 compositions, a chlorinated paraffin wax was added to the lacquers to 
further enhance X-ray contrast. 
 
During the characterization of paint films and polyester substrate material, elements other than Pb were detected but 
not quantified.  Elements detected in the uncoated polyester coupons are Na, P, S, Mn, Fe, Cu, Sr, and Sb.  Elements 
detected in the coated SRM coupons are Na, Al, Si, P, S, Cl, Mn, Fe, Cu, Sr, Sn, and Sb.  Of these elements, Cl and 
Cu are present in the dye compound used in all three levels, Cl was intentionally added to the lacquer formulations 
for Level 1 and Level 2 (see above), and Sb is present as residual catalyst in polyester. 
 
Measurements  for homogeneity testing of SRM 2569  were performed at NIST  using  wavelength dispersive X-ray 
fluorescence (XRF),  multiple  monochromatic  beam  energy  dispersive  XRF,  and  microbeam  XRF (microXRF).  
Additional homogeneity measurements were performed by collaborating laboratories using multiple monochromatic 
beam energy dispersive XRF and handheld XRF instrumentation.  Measurements for uniformity of coating thickness 
were  made  during  manufacturing  at  Rolla  Coatings  using  ultraviolet  light  absorption  spectrometry.    The 
manufacturer visually inspected all coupons and rejected those containing trapped particles and fibers. 
 
Test  Methods  Employed  at  NIST  and  Collaborating  Laboratories:    Determinations  of  mass  fraction  of  Pb  in 
paint  were 
plasma  mass 
isotope 
spectrometry (ID-ICPMS) [5].    Determinations  of  mass  of  Pb  per  unit  area  were  performed  at  NIST  using  XRF.  
Independent  values of  mass of Pb per unit area  were obtained by  calculation  using ID-ICPMS  values  of Pb  mass 
fraction, the  weighed total  mass of cured paint per coupon performed by  Rolla  Coatings, and the  mean  measured 
area of a coupon.  Measurements of thickness were performed at NIST using an outside micrometer gauge with the 
paint  film  thickness  determined  by  difference  between  coated  and  uncoated  coupons.    Independent  values  of 
thickness were calculated from experimentally determined values for paint density performed at NIST, the weighed 
total  mass  of  cured  paint  per  coupon,  and  the  mean  measured  area  of  a  coupon.    Density  determinations  were 
performed  at  NIST  by  weighing  cured  paint  films  in  air  and  in  water  and  applying  Archimedes’  principle  of 
buoyancy. 
 
Value  Assignments:    Each  certified  value  for  mass  fraction  of  Pb  is  the  mean  of  results  obtained  at  NIST  using 
ID-ICPMS [5].  For Level 2 and Level 3, the uncertainty listed with each mass fraction is an expanded uncertainty 
about  the  mean  with  coverage  factor  k = 2  (approximately  95 %  confidence),  calculated  by  combining  sources  of 
uncertainty  characteristic  of  the  test  method  and  the  material  according  to  the  ISO  Guide [6].    For  Level 1,  the 
certified value for mass fraction of Pb is an upper confidence bound (approximately 99 % confidence) based on the 
variance of ID-ICPMS results.   
 
The  certified values for  mass of Pb per unit area and for paint thickness are the  means  of sets of results obtained 
using the test methods and calculations listed above [6].  For Level 1, the certified value for mass of Pb per unit area 
is an  upper confidence bound (approximately 99 % confidence) based on  the variance of NIST XRF results.   For 
Level 2  and  Level 3,  the  uncertainty  listed  with  each  value  of  mass  of  Pb  per  unit  area  and  paint  thickness  is  an 
expanded  uncertainty  about  the  mean,  with  coverage  factor k = 2  (approximately  95 % confidence),  calculated 
following  the  ISO  Guide [6]  by  combining  a  between-method  variance  incorporating  differences  among  methods 
with a pooled, within-method variance and a component of variance accounting for coupon-to-coupon differences 
measured during homogeneity testing [8,9]. 
 
Each  reference  value  for  density  of  the  paint  is  the  result  obtained  at  NIST  using  a  gravimetric  procedure.    The 
uncertainty  listed  with  each  density  value  is  an  expanded  uncertainty  about  the  mean  with  coverage  factor  k = 2 
(approximately 95 % confidence), calculated by combining sources of uncertainty characteristic of the test method 
and the material according to the ISO Guide [6]. 
                                                 

inductively-coupled 

dilution 

using 

(1)  Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental  procedure.    Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  National  Institute  of 
Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the 
purpose. 
SRM 2569 

Page 3 of 5 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

Table 1.  Certified Values for SRM 2569 Lead Paint Films for Children’s Products 

Constituent 

Value 

Unit 

Level 1 

 
Level 2 

<0.2(a) 
<0.02(a) 
40.17    0.66 

Pb Mass Fraction 
Mass of Pb per Unit Area 
Paint Thickness 

Pb Mass Fraction 
Mass of Pb per Unit Area 
Paint Thickness 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) The value is an upper confidence bound (approximately 99 % confidence) based on the variance of measured results. 
 
 
 

 
 mg/kg 
μg/cm2 
μm
 
 
 mg/kg 
μg/cm2 
μm 
 
 
 mg/kg 
μg/cm2 
μm 


Pb Mass Fraction 
Mass of Pb per Unit Area 
Paint Thickness 
 

1.453    0.073 

0.225    0.043 

 
Level 3 

  2.4 

  3.6 

  2.4 

  3.8 

314.4 

39.4 

85.0 

22.9 

Table 2.  Reference Values for SRM 2569 Lead Paint Films for Children’s Products 
 

Constituent 

Value 
(g/cm3) 

Density of Paint 

1.145    0.008 

Density of Paint 

1.158    0.020 

Level 1 

 
Level 2 

 
Level 3  

Density of Paint 

1.160    0.012 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

Table 3.  Information Value for SRM 2569 Lead Paint Films for Children’s Products 
 

Constituent 

Polyester Substrate 

Thickness 

Value 
μm) 

167 

 

SRM 2569 

 

Page 4 of 5 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Thompson, A.;  Taylor, B.N.;  Guide  for  the  Use  of  the  International  System  of  Units (SI);  NIST  Special 
at 

Printing  Office:  Washington, DC 

available 

(2008); 

Publication 811;  U.S.  Government 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm/ (accessed May 2012). 

[2]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of 
Reference Materials for Chemical Measurements; NIST Special Publication 260-136; U.S. Government Printing 
Office: Washington, DC (2000); available at http://www.nist.gov/srm/publications.cfm (accessed May 2012). 
[3]  Sieber, J.R.;  Molloy, J.L.;  A  Guide  to  Using  SRM  2569  to  Validate  Analytical  Methods;  available  at 

https://www-s.nist.gov/srmors/view_datafiles.cfm?srm=2569 (accessed May 2012) 

[4]  Stuart, A.;  Ord, J.K.;  Kendall’s  Advanced  Theory  of  Statistics,  5th ed.;  Oxford  University  Press,  New  York 

Vol. 1, pp. 331–332 (1987). 

[5]  Murphy, K.E.; Beary, E.S.;  Rearick, M.S.;  Vocke, R.D.;  Isotope  Dilution  Inductively  Coupled  Plasma  Mass 
Spectrometry  (ID  ICP-MS)  for  the  Certification  of  Lead  and  Cadmium  in  Environmental  Standard  Reference 
Materials; Fres. J Anal. Chem., Vol. 368, pp. 362–370 (2000). 

[6]  JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(ISO GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections); Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (JCGM) (2008); available 
at http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf (accessed May 2012); see also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note  1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed May 2012). 

[7]  Rukhin, A.L.; Weighted Mean Statistics in Interlaboratory Studies; Metrologia, Vol. 46, pp. 323–331 (2009). 
[8]  DerSimonian, R.; Laird, N.; Meta-analysis in Clinical Trials; Control Clin. Trials, Vol. 7, pp. 177–188 (1986). 
[9]  Horn, R.A.;  Horn, S.A.;  Duncan, D.B.;  Estimating  Heteroscedastic  Variance  in  Linear  Models;  J.  Am.  Stat. 

Assoc., Vol. 70, pp. 380–385 (1975). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certificate  Revision  History:    17 May 2012  (Revised  uncertainty  values  for  certified  mass  of  Pb  per  unit  area  and  revised  “Instructions  for 
Handling, Storage, and Use”; editorial changes); 21 September 2011 (Original certificate date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished 
fax (301) 948-3730; 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

contacting 

telephone 

the 

by 

SRM 2569 

 

Page 5 of 5 

