 

:  Ba  *  National  Iustitute  of  Standards  &  Cerhnulogu 

 

Gertificate  of  Analysis

Standard Reference Material® 2583 

 

 
Trace Elements in Indoor Dust 
 
(Nominal Mass Fraction of 90 mg/kg Lead) 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended for use in the evaluation of methods and for the calibration of 
apparatus used to determine lead and other trace elements in dust.  SRM 2583 is composed of dust collected from 
vacuum cleaner bags used in the routine cleaning of interior dwelling spaces.  A unit of SRM 2583 consists of 8 g of 
particulate material, 99+ % of which passes a 100 µm (No. 145) sieve.  
 
The  certified  values  for  five  elements  in  SRM 2583  are  listed  in  Table 1.    The  certified  values  are  based  on 
measurements  using  two  or  more  independent  analytical  methods  or  a  single  NIST  primary  method.    Analytical 
methods used for the characterization of this SRM are given in Table 2.  All values are reported as mass fractions [1], 
on a dry basis (see “Instructions for Drying”), and are based on measurements using a sample mass of at least 100 mg. 
 

Element 

Arsenic (As) 
Cadmium (Cd) 
Chromium (Cr) 
Lead (Pb) 
Mercury (Hg) 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

1.6 
3.7 

7.0 
7.3 
80 
85.9 

 
 
  22 
 
1.56   

7.2 
0.19 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Certified Mass Fraction Values:  The certified values for lead and cadmium were determined by isotope dilution 
mass spectrometry (IDMS).  The certified values for the remaining elements were determined by combining data from 
two  or  more  independent  analytical  methods  in  the  manner  described  by  Schiller  and  Eberhardt [2].    Because  of 
evidence of inhomogeneity, the uncertainties for arsenic, cadmium, chromium, and lead are based on a 95 % prediction 
interval  for  the  true  value.    This  interval  includes  the  combined  effect  of  uncertainty  components  associated  with 
material inhomogeneity, measurement uncertainty, and an allowance for differences between the analytical methods 
used [3].  The uncertainty for mercury, which exhibited no evidence of inhomogeneity, is based on a 95 % confidence 
interval for the true value, including the combined effect of uncertainty components associated  with  measurement 
uncertainty and an allowance for differences between the analytical methods used.  The measurands are the total mass 
fractions  of  the  elements  listed  in  Table 1  and  are  metrologically  traceable  to  the  SI  unit  for  mass,  expressed  as 
milligrams per kilogram. 
 
Expiration  of  Certification:    The  certification  of  SRM 2583  lot  is  valid,  within  the  measurement  uncertainty 
specified, until 31 December 2023, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with the instructions given 
in this certificate (see  “Instructions  for Handling,  Storage,  and Use”).   The certification  is nullified if the SRM  is 
damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Overall  direction  and  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  the  certification  of  this  SRM  were 
performed by J.R. DeVoe, P.A. Pella, and R.L. Watters, Jr. of NIST. 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD  20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  29 January 2016 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Steven J. Choquette, Acting Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

 

SRM 2583 

 

Page 1 of 4 

Statistical consultation was provided by S.D. Leigh and K.R. Eberhardt of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
Partial  financial  support  for  the  development  of  this  SRM  was  provided  by  the  U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) under the direction of project managers S.L. Harper and M.E. Beard of the EPA Office of Research 
and Development, National Exposure Research Laboratory (Research Triangle Park, NC). 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
Stability:  This material is considered to be stable.   
 
Use:  To relate analytical determinations to the certified values on this Certificate of Analysis, a minimum sample 
mass of 100 mg should be used and the  sample should be dried according to the Instructions for Drying.  Sample 
preparation procedures should also be designed to effect complete dissolution in order to relate the determined value 
to the certified value.  This SRM must be stored in an air-conditioned or similar cool and dry environment away from 
sunlight and fumes. 
 
Instructions for Drying:  When nonvolatile elements (cadmium, chromium, and lead) are to be determined, samples 
should be oven dried for 2 h at 110 ºC.  Volatile elements (arsenic and mercury) should be determined on samples as 
received; separate samples should be dried according to these instructions to obtain a correction factor for moisture.  
Moisture corrections are then made to measurement values before comparing them to the certified values.  At NIST, 
mass loss on drying at the time of certification was found to be 3.9 % with a standard deviation (n = 6) of 0.6 %. 
 
COLLECTION, PREPARATION, AND ANALYSIS 
 
Collection:  The bulk of the  material for this SRM  was obtained from  households, cleaning  services,  motels, and 
hotels from North Carolina, Maryland, Ohio, and New Jersey.  The vacuum cleaner bags were collected under the 
direction of the Research Triangle Institute and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.  The collection process 
was coordinated by E.D. Hardison and D.A. Binstock, of the Research Triangle Institute (RTI) (Research Triangle 
Park, NC), under the leadership of W.F. Gutknecht. 
 
Preparation:    The  bags  were  labeled  to  provide  source  identification,  boxed  and  sent  to  Neutron Products, 
(Dickerson, MD),  for  radiation  sterilization,  and  then  shipped  to  NIST  for  processing.    The  initial  screening  and 
preparation to select suitable material were directed by P.A. Pella and performed by A.F. Marlow, C. Desai, P. Seo, 
and  D. Lillian  of  the  NIST  Chemistry  Sciences  Division.    A  sample  of  dust  from  each  bag  was  passed  through  a 
100 µm nylon sieve and measured by laboratory X-ray fluorescence.  Only bags containing dust measuring 60 µg/g 
to 300 µg/g of lead were retained for preparing this SRM.  The selected bags were processed by passing the contents 
of each bag through a coarse screen (2 mm hole size) to remove cotton and debris.  Using a vibrating stainless steel 
sieve apparatus, the resultant material was screened in two successive steps, first through a 250 µm sieve and then a 
100 µm sieve.  All material passing a 100 µm sieve was combined, resieved five times through a 250 µm sieve to 
remove hairs, blended in cone blender and then bottled. 
 
Analysis:  Certification analyses were performed in the NIST Chemical Sciences Division.  Analytical methods used 
at NIST are given in Table 2.  

SRM 2583 

 

Page 2 of 4 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table 2.  Methods used for the Analysis of SRM 2583 

Element 

Methods(a) 

Arsenic 
Cadmium 
Chromium 
Lead 
Mercury 

 

FIA-HGAAS, INAA 
ID-ICPMS, ICPMS 
INAA, ICPMS 
ID-ICPMS, ID-ICPMS (CFM), XRF 
FIA-CVAAS, INAA 

(a) Methods used for establishment of certified values are shown in bold-face type; methods used for information only values or to 

corroborate certified values are not in bold. 

  Methods: 

FIA-CVAAS 
FIA-HGAAS 
ICP-AES 
ICPMS 
ID-ICPMS 
ID-ICPMS (CFM) 

INAA 
XRF 

Flow injection analysis cold vapor atomic absorption spectrometry 
Flow injection hydride generation atomic absorption spectrometry 
Inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry 
Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry 
Isotope dilution inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry 
Isotope  dilution  inductively  coupled  plasma  mass  spectrometry  with  continuous  flow 
microwave digestion [4] 
Instrumental neutron activation analysis 
X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (wavelength-dispersive) 

 
NIST  Analysts:    E.S. Beary,  P.A. Pella,  M.S. Epstein,  M.S. Rearick,  E.A. Mackey,  A.F. Marlow  ,  G.C. Turk, 
J.R. Moody,  L.J. Wood,  K.E. Murphy,  and  R. Saraswati  (Guest  scientist  from  the  Defense  Metallurgical  Research 
Laboratory, India). 
 
User Experience with SRM 2583 
 
In order to demonstrate user experience with SRM 2583, a number of laboratories analyzed this material, each using 
its typical method.  Among the participants, the range of digestion procedures used included the EPA-SW846-3051 
and 3052 microwave digestion methods and the 3050A hotplate method.  In addition, EPA-SW846-7470A and 7471 
were  used  for  Hg,  and  ultrasonic  digestion  methods  were  used  for  Pb.    Instrumental  methods  included  ICPMS, 
Graphite Furnace AAS, Flame AAS, and Hg cold vapor AAS.  The results from this study were not used in calculating 
the certified values of SRM 2583.  The results are given in Table 3.  The summary statistics are based on 6 reported 
results for Pb, and 5 results for the other elements.  
 

Table 3.  Results of Round Robin Exercise 

Element 

Mean 
(mg/kg) 

Minimum 
(mg/kg) 

Maximum 
(mg/kg) 

s(a) 
(mg/kg) 

As 
Cd 
Cr 
Hg 
Pb 

  5.2 
  6.3 
44 
  1.5 
78 

(a) s is one standard deviation. 
 
 

 

  2.5 
  5.8 
33 
  1.3 
57 

  6.3 
  7.0 
67 
  1.7 
89 

  1.6 
  0.5 
13 
  0.2 
13 

SRM 2583 

 

Page 3 of 4 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Thompson, A.;  Taylor, B.N.;  Guide  for  the  Use  of  the  International  System  of  Units (SI);  NIST  Special 
at 

Printing  Office:  Washington, DC 

Publication 811;  U.S.  Government 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/sp811/index.cfm (accessed Jan 2016). 

available 

(2008); 

[2]  Schiller, S.B.;  Eberhardt, K.R.;  Combining  Data 
Spectrochimica Acta, Vol. 46B, pp. 1607–1613 (1991). 

from 

Independent  Chemical  Analysis  Methods, 

[3]  JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data - Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement; 
(GUM 1995  with  Minor  Corrections),  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology (JCGM)  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Jan 2016);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed Jan 2016). 

[4]  Beary, E.S.;  Paulsen, P.J.;  Jassie, L.B.;  Fassett, J.D.;  Determination  of  Environmental  Lead  Using 
Continuous-Flow  Microwave  Digestion  Isotope  Dilution  Inductively  Coupled  Plasma  Mass  Spectrometry, 
Analytical Chemistry, Vol. 69, No. 4, pp. 758–766 (1997). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certificate Revision History:  29 January 2016 (Change of expiration date; editorial changes); 30 November 2010 (Change of expiration date; 
editorial changes); 22 June 1998 (Addition of round robin data and editorial revision of Table 2); 30 December 1996 (Original certification date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
(301) 948-3730; 
telephone 
accomplished  by  contacting 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

fax 

 

SRM 2583 

 

Page 4 of 4 

