National Institute of Standards & Technology



Certificate of Analysis



Standard Reference Material 2612a



Carbon Monoxide in Air



	(Nominal AmountofSubstance Fraction 10 µmol/mol)

	

This certificate reports the certified values for Lot 23FXX.



This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is a primary gas mixture for which the amountofsubstance fraction, expressed as concentration [1], may be related to secondary working standards.  This SRM is intended for the calibration of instruments used for carbon monoxide determinations and for other applications.



This SRM mixture is supplied in a DOT 3ALspecification aluminum (6061 alloy) cylinder with a water volume of 6 L.  Mixtures are shipped with a nominal pressure exceeding 12.4 MPa (1800 psig), which provides the user with 0.73 m3 (25.8 ft3) of useable mixture.  The cylinder is the property of the purchaser and is equipped with a CGA590 brass valve, which is the recommended outlet for this carbon monoxide mixture.  



Certified Value:  This SRM mixture has been certified for carbon monoxide concentration.  The certified value given below applies to the identified cylinder and NIST sample number. 



				Carbon Monoxide Concentration:	9.75 µmol/mol    0.12 µmol/mol



				Cylinder Number:  SAMPLE	NIST Sample Number:  SAMPLE

				Hydrotest Date:  SAMPLE	Blend Date:  March 1996



A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy in that all known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [2].  The uncertainty of the certified value includes the estimated uncertainties in the NIST standards, the analytical comparisons to the lot standard (LS), and the uncertainty of comparing the LS with each of the mixtures comprising this lot.  The uncertainty is expressed as an expanded uncertainty U = kuc with uc determined by experiment and a coverage factor k = 2.  The true value for the carbon monoxide amountofsubstance fraction is asserted to lie in the interval defined by the certified value  U with a level of confidence of approximately 95 % [3].



Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2612a Lot No. 26FXX is valid from the certificate issue date, within the measurement uncertainty specified, until 04 November 2021, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with the instructions given in this certificate (see “Cylinder and Gas Handling Information”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified.



Cylinder and Gas Handling Information:  NIST recommends the use of a highpurity, twostage pressure regulator with a stainless steel diaphragm and CGA590 outlet to safely reduce the pressure and to deliver this SRM mixture to the instrument.  The regulator should be purged to prevent accidental contamination of the SRM by repeatedly (minimum three times) opening the valve and pressurizing the regulator, then closing the valve and releasing the pressure safely into a vent line.  This SRM should not be used after the internal pressure drops below 0.7 MPa (100 psig).  This SRM should be stored under normal laboratory conditions within the temperature range of 15 ºC to 30 ºC.



Overall direction and coordination of the technical work required for certification of this SRM were performed by F.R. Guenther of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division.

		Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief

		Chemical Sciences Division



		Gaithersburg, MD 20899	Robert L. Watters, Jr., Director

	Certificate Issue Date:  02 January 2014	Office of Reference Materials

	Certificate Revision History on Last Page.

	Analytical measurements leading to the certification of the current SRM lot were performed by M.E. Kelley of the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division.

	

	Support aspects involved in the issuance of this SRM were coordinated through the NIST Office of Reference Materials.



Traceability:  The measurand is the total concentration of carbon monoxide in air and the certified value is metrologically traceable to the SI unit of micromoles carbon monoxide per total moles of carbon monoxide and air.



Maintenance of SRM Certification:  Periodic analyses of SRM units from this lot are performed at NIST to monitor stability.  If significant changes occur that affect the certification before the expiration of this certificate, NIST will notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification.



Mixture Preparation:  The gas mixtures comprising this SRM lot were prepared in accordance with NIST technical specifications by a commercial specialty gas vendor under contract to NIST.  The specifications stipulate that each SRM mixture be identical in carbon monoxide concentration and stable with time.



Analytical Methods:  Analyses of the carbon monoxide concentration for this lot of cylinders were conducted by comparing each cylinder mixture to a representative cylinder chosen from the lot, the LS, using nondispersive infrared (NDIR) spectroscopy.  Assignment of the carbon monoxide concentration to the LS was accomplished by comparison to primary gravimetric standards using gas chromatography with a flame ionization detector and methanizer (GC/Meth/FID).



Homogeneity Analysis:  Each of the carbon monoxide mixtures that comprise this SRM lot was compared to the LS using NDIR spectroscopy.  A statistical analysis of the analytical results indicated that sampletosample carbon monoxide concentration differences were not statistically significant.  This indicates that, within the precision of the NIST measurements, all of the cylinders comprising this SRM lot have identical carbon monoxide concentrations.  Therefore, one concentration has been assigned to the entire SRM lot. 



Carbon Monoxide Concentration Value Assignment:  The certified carbon monoxide concentration for this SRM lot was computed from the assigned concentration for the LS and the homogeneity analysis.



			CAS Registry Numbers:  This SRM is certified for carbon monoxide in air.  The relevant CAS Registry numbers for these components are: carbon monoxide CAS Registry 630080; air CAS Registry 132259100.





REFERENCES



	[1]	Thompson, A.; Taylor, B.N.; Guide for the Use of the International System of Units (SI); NIST Special Publication 811; U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (2008); available at http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/sp811/index.cfm (accessed Jan 2014).

				[2]	JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement (GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections); Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (2008); available at http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf (accessed Jan 2014); see also Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results; NIST Technical Note 1297; U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (1994); available at http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed Jan 2014).

				[3]	May, W., Parris, R., Beck, C., Fassett, J., Greenberg, R., Guenther, F., Kramer, G., Wise, S., Gills, T., Colbert, J., Gettings, R., MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of Reference Materials for Chemical Measurements; NIST Special Publication 260-136, U.S. Government Printing Office; Washington, DC (2000); available at http://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF (accessed Jan 2014).

				

Certificate Revision History:  02 January 2014 (Extension of certification period; editorial changes); 13 January 2006 (Extension of certification period; editorial changes); 25 July 2001 (Extension of certification period; editorial changes); 23 June 1997 (Original certificate date).

				

Users of this SRM should ensure that the Certificate of Analysis in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished by contacting the SRM Program:  telephone (301) 9752200; fax (301) 9483730; email srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm.







	SRM 2612a	Page 1 of 2