 

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material 2620a 
 
Carbon Dioxide in Nitrogen 
 
(Nominal Amount-of-Substance Fraction 1 % mol/mol) 
 
This certificate reports the certified values for Lot 31-H-XX. 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  a  primary  gas  mixture  for  which  the  amount-of-substance  fraction, 
expressed  as  concentration  [1],  may  be  related  to  secondary  working  standards.    This  SRM  is  intended  for  the 
calibration of instruments used for carbon dioxide determinations and for other applications. 
 
This SRM mixture is supplied in a DOT 3AL-specification aluminum (6061 alloy) cylinder with a water volume of 
6 L.  Mixtures are shipped with a nominal pressure exceeding 12.4 MPa (1800 psig), which provides the user with 
0.73 m3 (25.8 ft3) of useable mixture.  The cylinder is the property of the purchaser and is equipped with a CGA–580 
brass valve, which is the recommended outlet for this carbon dioxide mixture.   
 
Certified Value:  This SRM mixture has been certified for carbon dioxide concentration.  The certified value given 
below applies to the identified cylinder and NIST sample number.  

 

Carbon Dioxide Concentration: 

  0.9955 % mol/mol  ±  0.0016 % mol/mol 

Cylinder Number:  SAMPLE 
Hydrotest Date:  October 2016 

SAMPLE 
NIST Sample Number:  SAMPLE 
Blend Date:  July 2017 

 
 
 
 
 
A NIST certified  value is a  value  for  which NIST has the  highest confidence in its accuracy  in that all known or 
suspected sources of bias  have been investigated or taken into account [2].  The uncertainty of the certified value 
includes the estimated uncertainties in the NIST standards, the analytical comparisons to the lot standard (LS), and 
the uncertainty of comparing the LS with each of the mixtures comprising this lot.  The uncertainty is expressed as an 
expanded uncertainty U = kuc with uc determined by experiment and a coverage factor k = 2.  The true value for the 
carbon dioxide amount-of-substance fraction is asserted to lie in the interval defined by the certified value ± U with a 
level of confidence of approximately 95 % [3]. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2620a Lot No. 31-H-XX is valid from this certificate issue 
ad  in 
date, within the measurement uncertainties specified, until 08 May 2026, provided the SRM is handled and stored in 
accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this  certificate  (see  “Cylinder  and  Gas  Handling  Information”).    The 
certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Cylinder and Gas Handling Information:  NIST recommends the use of a high-purity, two-stage pressure regulator 
with a stainless-steel diaphragm and CGA-580 outlet to safely reduce the pressure and to deliver this SRM mixture to 
the  instrument.    The  regulator  should  be  purged  to  prevent  accidental  contamination  of  the  SRM  by  repeatedly 
(minimum  three  times)  opening  the  valve  and  pressurizing  the  regulator,  then  closing  the  valve  and  releasing  the 
pressure  safely  into  a  vent  line.    This  SRM  should  not  be  used  after  the  internal  pressure  drops  below 
0.7 MPa (100 psig).  This SRM should be stored under normal laboratory conditions within the temperature range of 
15 ºC to 30 ºC. 
 
Overall direction and coordination of the technical work required for certification of this SRM were performed by 
J.T. Hodges of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899  
Certificate Issue Date:  01 March 2019 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

cal  Sciences

Page 1 of 3 

  

SRM 2620a 

KJ. 

carbon  dioxide

carbon  dioxide 

 
Analytical  measurements leading  to the certification of the  current SRM lot  were performed by K.J. Harris of the 
NIST Chemical Sciences Division.   
 
Office  of  Reference 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
f  carbon  dioxide  in  nitrogen  and  the  certified  value  is 
Traceability:    The  measurand  is  the  total  concentration  of  carbon  dioxide  in  nitrogen  and  the  certified  value  is 
metrologically traceable to the SI unit of micromole carbon dioxide per total moles of carbon dioxide and nitrogen. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Mixture Preparation:  The gas mixtures comprising this SRM lot were prepared in accordance with NIST technical 
specifications by a commercial specialty gas vendor under contract to NIST.  The specifications stipulate that each 
SRM mixture be identical in carbon dioxide concentration and stable with time. 
 
Analytical  Methods:    Analyses  of  the  carbon  dioxide  concentration  for  this  lot  of  cylinders  were  conducted  by 
comparing each cylinder mixture to a representative cylinder chosen from the lot, the LS, using gas chromatography 
with  thermal  conductivity  detection (GC-TCD).    Assignment  of  the  carbon  dioxide  concentration  to  the  LS  was 
accomplished by comparison to primary gravimetric standards using GC-TCD. 
 
Homogeneity Analysis:  Each of the carbon dioxide mixtures that comprise this SRM lot was compared to the LS 
using  GC-TCD.    A  statistical  analysis  of  the  analytical  results  indicated  that  sample-to-sample  carbon  dioxide 
concentration  differences  were  not  statistically  significant.    This  indicates  that,  within  the  precision  of  the  NIST 
measurements, all of the cylinders comprising this SRM lot have identical carbon dioxide concentrations.  Therefore, 
one concentration has been assigned to the entire SRM lot.  
 
Carbon Dioxide Concentration Value Assignment:  The certified carbon dioxide concentration for this SRM lot 
was computed from the assigned concentration for the lot standard and the homogeneity analysis. 
 
CAS Registry Numbers:  This SRM is certified for carbon dioxide in nitrogen.  The relevant CAS Registry numbers 
for these components are: Carbon dioxide CAS Registry 124-38-9; nitrogen CAS Registry 7727-37-9. 
 
Information Values: Results for additional analyses performed during the certification process are given below. The 
concentrations  reported  are  NOT  certified  values.  These  values  are  given  for  informational  purposes  only.  An 
information  value  is  considered  to  be  a  value  that  will  be  of  interest  to  the  SRM  user,  but  for  which  insufficient 
information is available to assess adequately the uncertainty associated with the value, or only a limited number of 
analyses were performed [3]. Information values cannot be used to establish metrological traceability. 
 
Constituent 
Carbon monoxide 
Water 
Total hydrocarbons 
(Expressed as Methane) 
Nitrogen 
 

Concentration/Method 
< 1 µmol/mol (as determined by cavity enhance absorption spectroscopy) 
< 1 µmol/mol (as determined by P2O5 adsorption)  
< 10 nmol/mol (as determined by FT-IR spectroscopy) 
 
Balance 

CAS Registry 
630-08-0 
7732-18-5 
74-98-6 

7727-37-9 

 

  

SRM 2620a 

Page 2 of 3 

 

REFERENCES 

 
 
[1]  Thompson, A.;  Taylor, B.N.;  Guide  for  the  Use  of  the  International  System  of  Units  (SI);  NIST  Special 
at 

Printing  Office:  Washington, DC 

Publication 811;  U.S.  Government 
https://www.nist.gov/pml/special-publication-811 (accessed Mar 2019). 

available 

(2008); 

[3] 

[2]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of 
Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136  (2000);  available  at 
https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/srm/SP260-136.PDF (accessed Mar 2019). 
JCGM 100:2008;  Evaluation  of  Measurement  Data  −  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  in  Measurement  (ISO 
GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections); Joint  Committee  for Guides in Metrology (JCGM) (2008); available at 
https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Mar  2019);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results; NIST Technical Note 1297; U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (1994); available at 
https://www.nist.gov/pml/nist-technical-note-1297 (accessed Mar 2019). 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program:    telephone  (301) 975-2200;  fax  (301) 948-3730;  e-mail 
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

SRM 2620a 

Page 3 of 3 

