 

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material 2638a 
 
Carbon Monoxide in Nitrogen 
 
 ~—~*d 
(Nominal Amount-of-Substance Fraction 5000 µmol/mol) 
 
This certificate reports the certified values for Lot 55-G-XX. 

00n 

 (SRM) is a primary gas mixture 

for which   the amount -of-substance fraction , 

 
This Standard Reference Material
expressed as concentration  [1], may be related to secondary working standards.  This SRM is intended for the 
calibration of instruments used for carbon monoxide determinations and for other applications. 
 
This SRM mixture is supplied in a DOT  3AL-specification aluminum (6061 alloy) cylinder with a water volume of 
6 L.  Mixtures are shipped with a nominal pressure exceeding 12.4  MPa (1800 psig), which provides the user with 
0.73 m3 (25.8 ft3) of useable mixture.  The cylinder is the property of the purchaser and is equip ped with a CGA-350 
brass valve, which is the recommended outlet for this carbon monoxide mixture.   
 
Certified Value:  This SRM mixture has been certified for carbon monoxide concentration.  The certified value given 
below applies to the identified cylinder and NIST sample number.  

ide 

 

 
+

Carbon Monoxide Concentration: 

4957.9 µmol/mol  ±  7.4 µmol/mol 

Cylinder Number:  SAMPLE 
Hydrotest Date:  January 2016 

\MPLE 
NIST Sample Number:  SAMPLE 
Blend Date: October 2018 

 
 
 
 
 
ccuracy in that all known or 
A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its a
suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account
 [2].   The uncertainty of the cert ified value 
includes the estimated uncertainties in the NIST standards, the analytical c omparisons to the lot standard (LS), and 
the uncertainty of comparing the LS with each of the mixtures comprising this lot.  The uncertainty is expressed as an 
expanded uncertainty U = kuc with uc determined by experiment and a coverage factor  k = 2.04.  The true value for 
the carbon monoxide amount-of-substance fraction is asserted to lie in the interval defined by the certified v alue ± U 
with a level of confidence of approximately 95 % [3]. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2638a Lot No. 55-G-XX is valid from this certificate issue 
date, within the measurement uncertainties specified , until 18 September 2027, provided the SRM is handled and 
stored in accordance with the instructions given in this  certificate (see “Cylinder and Gas Handling Information”) .  
The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Cylinder and Gas Handling Information:  NIST recommends the use of a high-purity, two-stage pressure regulator 
with a stainless-steel diaphragm and CGA-350 outlet to safely reduce the pressure and to deliver this SRM mixture to 
the instrument.   The regulator should be purged to prevent accidental contamination of the 
SRM  by repeatedly 
(minimum three times) opening the valve and pressurizing the regulator, then closing t
he valve and releasing the 
pressure safely into a vent line .    This SRM should not be used   after the internal pressure drops   below  0.7 MPa 
(100 psig).  This SRM should be stored under normal laboratory conditions within the temperature ran ge of 15 ºC to 
30 ºC. 
 
Overall direction and coordination of the technical work required for certification of
J.T. Hodges of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD  20899  
Certificate Issue Date:  25 February 2020 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

 this SRM were performed by 

cal  Sciences

Page 1 of 3 

  

SRM 2638a  

W 

ff  carbon  monoxide  | 

Office  of  Reference 
T  Office of Reference 

 
Analytical measurements leading to the certification of th e current SRM lot were performed by  W.R. Miller of the 
NIST Chemical Sciences Division.   
 
Support aspects involved in the issuance of this SRM were coordinated through the NIS
Materials. 
 
Traceability:   The measurand is the total concentration of carbon monoxide  in nitrogen and the  certified value is 
metrologically traceable to the SI unit of micromole s of carbon monoxide per total moles of  carbon monoxide and 
nitrogen. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  Periodic analyses of SRM units from this lot are performed at NIST to monitor 
stability.  If significant changes occur that affect the certification before  the expiration of this  certificate, NIST will 
notify the purchaser. Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Mixture Preparation:  The gas mixtures comprising this SRM lot were prepared in accordance with NIST technical 
specifications by a commercial specialty gas vendor under contract to NIST.  Th e specifications stipulate that each 
SRM mixture be identical in carbon monoxide concentration and stable with time. 
 
Analytical Methods:   Analyses of the carbon monoxide  concentration for this lot of cylinders were conducted by 
comparing each cylinder mixture to a representative cylinder chosen from the lot, the LS, using a gas chromatograph 
equipped with a thermal conductivity detector (GC/TCD) to primary gravimetric standards.   
 
Homogeneity Analysis:  Each of the carbon monoxide mixtures that comprise this SRM lot was compared to the LS 
using a GC/TCD.  A statistical analysis of the analytical results indicated that sample
-to-sample carbon monoxide 
concentration differences were not statistically significant.  This indicates tha
measurements, all of the cylinders comprising this SRM lot have identical 
Therefore, one concentration has been assigned to the entire SRM lot.  
  
Assignment: 
Carbon Monoxide Concentration Value Assignment:  The certified carbon monoxide concentration for this SRM 
lot was computed from the assigned concentration for the lot standard and the homogeneity analysis. 
 
CAS Registry Number s:   This SRM is certified for   carbon monoxide   in nitrogen.  The re levant CAS Registry 
numbers for these components are: carbon monoxide CAS Registry 630-08-0; nitrogen CAS Registry 7727-37-9. 
 
Information Values:  Results for additional analyses performed during the certification process are given below.  The 
ional purposes only.  An 
concentrations reported are NOT certified values.  These values are given for informat
information value is considered to be a value that will be of intere
st to the SRM user, but for which insufficient 
information is available to assess adequa tely the uncertainty associated with the value, or only a limited number of 
analyses were performed [3].   
 

carbon monoxide   concentrations.  

t, within the precision of the NIST 

carbon  monoxide 

carbon  monoxide 

-bon  monoxide 

for 

- 

- 

-

Constituent 

CAS Registry 

Concentration 
 

Method 

Carbon Dioxide 
Water 
Methane 
Total other hydrocarbons (expressed as Methane) 
Nitrogen 

 
 
 
 
 

124-38-9 
7732-18-5 
74-82-8 
74-82-8 
7727-37-9 

  < 1 µmol/mol 
  < 1 µmol/mol 
  < 50 nmol/mol 
 < 100 nmol/mol 

Balance 

FTIR 
P2O5 adsorption 
FTIR(a) 
GC/FID 
not applicable 

(a) Value determined by Manufacturer’s analysis. 
 
 

 

SRM 2638a  

Page 2 of 3 

 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Thompson, A.; Taylor,  B.N.;  Guide for the Use of the International System of Units

Publication 811; U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC
https://www.nist.gov/pml/special-publication-811 (accessed Feb 2020). 

 (SI); NIST Special 

 (2008); available at 

 (2000); available at 

[2]  May, W., Parris, R., Beck, C., Fassett, J., Greenberg, R., Guenther, F., Kramer, G., Wise, S., Gills, T., Colbert, J., 
Gettings, R., MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of Reference 
Materials for Chemical Measurements;  NIST Special Publication 260 -136, U.S. Government Printing Office; 
Washington, DC
https://www.nist.gov/system/files/documents/srm/SP260-
136.PDF (accessed Feb 2020). 
JCGM 100:2008;  Evaluation of Measurement Data 
Measurement (GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections); Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (2008); available 
at https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf (accessed Jan 2020); see also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt,  C.E.;  Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results; NIST Technical Note  1297; U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington,
https://www.nist.gov/pml/nist-technical-note-1297 (accessed Feb 2020). 

—  Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in 

 DC (1994); available at 

[3] 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users of this SRM should ensure that the Certificate of Analysis in their possession is
accomplished by contacting the SRM Program:  telephone
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

 (301) 975 -2200; fax  (301) 948 -3730; e -mail 

 current.  This can be 

SRM 2638a  

Page 3 of 3 

