 

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material 2640a 
 
Carbon Monoxide in Nitrogen 
 
(Nominal Amount-of-Substance Fraction 2 % mol/mol) 
 
This certificate reports the certified values for Lot 53-C-XX. 

in 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  a  primary  gas  mixture  for  which  the  amount-of-substance  fraction, 
expressed  as  concentration  [1],  may  be  related  to  secondary  working  standards.    The  SRM  is  intended  for  the 
calibration of instruments used for carbon monoxide determinations and for other applications. 
 
This SRM mixture is supplied in a DOT 3AL-specification aluminum (6061 alloy) cylinder with a water volume of 
6 L.  Mixtures are shipped with a nominal pressure exceeding 12.4 MPa (1800 psig), which provides the user with 
0.73  m3  (25.8  ft3)  of  useable  mixture.    The  cylinder  is  the  property  of  the  purchaser  and  is  equipped  with  a 
CGA-350 brass valve, which is the recommended outlet for this carbon monoxide mixture.   
 
Certified Value:  This SRM mixture has been certified for carbon monoxide concentration.  The certified value given 
below applies to the identified cylinder and NIST sample number.  
 
 

Concentration: 
Carbon Monoxide Mass Fraction Concentration: 

1.978 % mol/mol  ±  0.011 % mol/mol 

Cylinder Number:  SAMPLE 
ctober  1996 
Hydrotest Date:  October 1996 

PLE 
NIST Sample Number:  SAMPLE 
Blend Date:  December 1996 

 
 
 
A NIST certified  value is a  value  for  which NIST has the  highest confidence in its accuracy  in that all known or 
suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [2].  The uncertainty of the certified value 
includes the estimated uncertainties in the NIST standards, the analytical comparisons to the lot standard (LS), and 
the uncertainty of comparing the LS with each of the mixtures comprising this lot.  The uncertainty is expressed as an 
expanded uncertainty U = kuc with uc determined by experiment and a coverage factor k = 2.  The true value for the 
carbon monoxide amount-of-substance fraction is asserted to lie in the interval defined by the certified value ± U with 
a level of confidence of approximately 95 % [3]. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2640a Lot No. 53-C-XX is valid, within the measurement 
uncertainty specified, until 30 July 2022, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with the instructions 
given in this certificate (see “Cylinder and Gas Handling Information”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is 
damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Cylinder and Gas Handling Information:  NIST recommends the use of a high-purity, two-stage pressure regulator 
with a stainless steel diaphragm and CGA-350 outlet to safely reduce the pressure and to deliver this SRM mixture to 
the  instrument.    The  regulator  should  be  purged  to  prevent  accidental  contamination  of  the  SRM  by  repeatedly 
(minimum  three  times)  opening  the  valve  and  pressurizing  the  regulator,  then  closing  the  valve  and  releasing  the 
pressure  safely  into  a  vent  line.    This  SRM  should  not  be  used  after  the  internal  pressure  drops  below  0.7  MPa 
(100 psig).  This SRM should be stored under normal laboratory conditions within the temperature range of 15 ºC to 
30 ºC. 
 
e  performed  by
Overall direction and coordination of the technical work required for certification of this SRM were performed by 
F.R. Guenther of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD  20899  
Certificate Issue Date:  15 September 2014 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

Page 1 of 2 

  

SRM 2640a 

ficat 

cal  Sciences 

f  carbon  monoxide 

 
Analytical  measurements  leading  to  the  certification  of  the  current  SRM  lot  were  performed  by  W.R.  Miller  and 
P.A. Johnson of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division.   
 
Office  of  Reference 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
Traceability:  The measurand is the total concentration of carbon monoxide in nitrogen and the certified value is 
metrologically traceable to the SI unit of micromoles of carbon monoxide per total moles of carbon monoxide and 
nitrogen. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If significant 
changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST will  notify  the  purchaser. 
Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Mixture Preparation:  The gas mixtures comprising this SRM lot were prepared in accordance with NIST technical 
specifications by a commercial specialty gas vendor under contract to NIST.  The specifications stipulate that each 
SRM mixture be identical in carbon monoxide concentration and stable with time. 
 
Analytical Methods:  Analyses of the carbon monoxide concentration for this lot of cylinders were conducted by 
intercomparing each cylinder mixture to a representative cylinder chosen from the lot, the lot standard (LS), using 
Thermal  Conductivity  Detection  (GC/TCD).    Assignment  of  the  carbon  monoxide  concentration  to  the  LS  was 
accomplished by intercomparison to primary gravimetric standards using GC/TCD. 
 
Homogeneity Analysis:  Each of the carbon monoxide mixtures that comprise this SRM lot was compared to the LS 
using  GC/TCD.    A  statistical  analysis  of  the  analytical  results  indicated  that  sample-to-sample  carbon  monoxide 
concentration  differences  were  not  statistically  significant.    This  indicates  that,  within  the  precision  of  the  NIST 
measurements,  all  of  the  cylinders  comprising  this  SRM  lot  have  identical  carbon  monoxide  concentrations.  
Therefore, one concentration has been assigned to the entire SRM lot.  
 
Carbon Monoxide Concentration Value Assignment:  The certified carbon monoxide concentration for this SRM 
lot was computed from the assigned concentration for the LS and the homogeneity analysis. 
 
CAS  Registry  Numbers:    This  SRM  is  certified  for  carbon  monoxide  in  nitrogen.    The  relevant  CAS  Registry 
numbers for these components are: carbon monoxide CAS Registry 630-08-0; nitrogen CAS Registry 7727-37-9. 
 
 

carbon  monoxide 

on  monoxide 

oe 

for 

- 

- 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Thompson,  A.;  Taylor,  B.N.;  Guide  for  the  Use  of  the  International  System  of  Units  (SI);  NIST  Special 
at 

Publication  811;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington,  DC 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/sp811/index.cfm (accessed Sep 2014). 

available 

(2008); 

[3] 

[2]  May, W.; Parris, R.; Beck, C.; Fassett, J.; Greenberg, R.; Guenther, F.; Kramer, G.; Wise, S.; Gills, T.; Colbert, J.; 
Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of Reference 
Materials for Chemical Measurements; NIST Special Publication 260-136, U.S. Government Printing Office; 
Washington, DC (2000); available at http://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF (accessed Sep 2014). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(GUM  1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Sep  2014);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results; NIST Technical Note 1297; U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (1994); available at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed Sep 2014). 

 
 

 
Certificate Revision History:  15 September 2014 (Extension of certification period; editorial changes); 13 March 2008 (Editorial correction 
to  the  fill  date;  extension  of  certification  period);  15  July  2005  (Editorial  correction  to  the  units  for  the  carbon  monoxide  concentration); 
13 July 2005 (Extension of certification period); 04 December 2002 (Extension of certification period); 17 September 1997 (Original certificate 
date). 

 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  certificate  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be accomplished by 
contacting the SRM Program at:  telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the 
Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 2640a 

Page 2 of 2 

