 

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material 2644a 

 

 
Propane in Nitrogen 
 
[/mol) 
(Nominal Amount-of-Substance Fraction 250 µmol/mol) 
 
This certificate reports the certified values for Lot 101-C-XX. 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  a  primary  gas  mixture  for  which  the  amount-of-substance  fraction, 
expressed  as  concentration  [1],  may  be  related  to  secondary  working  standards.    This  SRM  is  intended  for  the 
calibration of instruments used for propane determinations and for other applications. 
 
This SRM mixture is supplied in a DOT 3AL-specification aluminum (6061 alloy) cylinder with a water volume of 
6 L.  Mixtures are shipped with a nominal pressure exceeding 11.0 MPa (1600 psig), which provides the user with 
0.63 m3 (22.2 ft3) of useable mixture.  The cylinder is the property of the purchaser and is equipped with a CGA-350 
brass valve, which is the recommended outlet for this propane mixture.   
 
Certified Value:  This SRM mixture has been certified for propane concentration.  The certified value given below 
applies to the identified cylinder and NIST sample number.  
 
 

246.5 µmol/mol  ±  1.0 µmol/mol 

Propane Concentration: 

propane 

SAMPLE 
NIST Sample Number:  SAMPLE 
Blend Date:  June 2000 

Cylinder Number:  SAMPLE 
Hydrotest Date: February 2000 

 
 
 
all  known  or 
A NIST certified  value is a  value  for  which NIST  has the  highest confidence in its accuracy  in that all known or 
suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [2].  The uncertainty of the certified value 
includes the estimated uncertainties in the NIST standards, the analytical comparisons to the lot standard (LS), and 
the uncertainty of comparing the LS with each of the mixtures comprising this lot.  The uncertainty is expressed as an 
expanded uncertainty U = kuc with uc determined by experiment and a coverage factor k = 2.  The true value for the 
propane amount-of-substance fraction is asserted to lie in the interval defined by the certified value ± U with a level 
of confidence of approximately 95 % [3]. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2644a Lot No. 101-C-XX is valid from the certificate issue 
din 
date, within the measurement uncertainty specified, until 07 July 2022, provided the SRM is handled and stored in 
accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this  certificate  (see  “Cylinder  and  Gas  Handling  Information”).    The 
certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Cylinder and Gas Handling Information:  NIST recommends the use of a high-purity, two-stage stainless steel 
pressure regulator with a stainless steel diaphragm and CGA-350 outlet to safely reduce the pressure and to deliver 
this SRM mixture to the instrument.  The regulator should be purged to prevent accidental contamination of the SRM 
by repeatedly (minimum  three times) opening the valve and pressurizing the regulator, then closing the valve and 
releasing the pressure safely into a vent line.  This SRM should not be used after the internal pressure drops below 
0.7 MPa (100 psig).  This SRM should be stored under normal laboratory conditions within the temperature range of 
15 ºC to 30 ºC. 
 
Overall direction and coordination of the technical work required for certification of this SRM were performed by 
F.R. Guenther of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  24 July 2014 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page. 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

Chemical  Sciences

Page 1 of 2 

  

SRM 2644a 

M.E 

propane 

"  propane 

 
Analytical measurements leading to the certification of the current SRM lot were performed by M.E. Kelley of the 
NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
Traceability:  The measurand is the total concentration of propane in nitrogen and the certified value is metrologically 
traceable to the SI unit of micromoles propane per total moles of propane and nitrogen. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  Periodic analyses of SRM units from this lot are performed at NIST to monitor 
stability.  If significant changes occur that affect the certification before the expiration of this certificate, NIST will 
notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
l 
Mixture Preparation:  The gas mixtures comprising this SRM lot were prepared in accordance with NIST technical 
tions  stipulate  that  each 
specifications by a commercial specialty gas vendor under contract to NIST.  The specifications stipulate that each 
SRM mixture be identical in propane concentration and stable with time. 
 
Analytical Methods:  Analyses of the propane concentration for this lot of cylinders were conducted by comparing 
each cylinder mixture to a representative cylinder chosen from the lot, the LS, using gas chromatograph with flame 
ionization detector (GC-FID).  Assignment of the propane concentration to the LS was accomplished by comparison 
to primary gravimetric standards using GC-FID. 
 
Homogeneity Analysis:  Each of the propane mixtures that comprise this SRM lot was compared to the LS using 
GC-FID.    A  statistical  analysis  of  the  analytical  results  indicated  that  sample-to-sample  propane  concentration 
differences were not statistically significant.  This indicates that, within the precision of the NIST measurements, all 
of the cylinders comprising this SRM lot have identical propane concentrations.  Therefore, one concentration has 
been assigned to the entire SRM lot.  
 
Propane Concentration Value Assignment:  The certified propane concentration for this SRM lot was computed 
analysis. 
from the assigned concentration for the lot standard and the homogeneity analysis. 
 
This  SRM  is  certified  for  propane 
CAS Registry Numbers:  This SRM is certified for propane in nitrogen.  The relevant CAS Registry numbers for 
these components are: propane CAS Registry 74-98-6; nitrogen CAS Registry 7727-37-9. 
 

1  propane 

2  propane 

pane 

74- 

- 

REFERENCES 
 

[1] 

Thompson,  A.;  Taylor,  B.N.;  Guide  for  the  Use  of  the  International  System  of  Units  (SI);  NIST  Special 
Publication  811;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington,  DC 
(2008);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/sp811/index.cfm (accessed Jul 2014). 

[2]  May,  W.;  Parris,  R.;  Beck,  C.;  Fassett,  J.;  Greenberg,  R.;  Guenther,  F.;  Kramer,  G.;  Wise,  S.;  Gills,  T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment 
of  Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136,  U.S.  Government 
Printing  Office;  Washington,  DC  (2000);  available  at  http://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF 
(accessed Jul 2014). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(GUM  1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Jul  2014);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results; NIST Technical Note 1297; U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (1994); available at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed Jul 2014). 

[3] 

 
 
 

  
Certificate Revision History:  24 July 2014 (Extension of certification period; editorial changes); 18 October 2007 (Extension of certification 
period); 16 March 2004 (Extension of certification period); 26 December 2000 (Original certificate date). 

 
 
 
This  can  be 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
,  e
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program  at:    telephone  (301)  975-2200;  fax  (301)  948-3730;  e-mail 
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

301) 

- 

SRM 2644a 

Page 2 of 2 

