National Institute of Standards and Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material 2891 

 

 
Ethanol-Water Solution  
ion 
0.02 
(Nominal Mass Fraction 0.02 %) 
 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is a solution of ethanol (ethyl alcohol:  Chemical Abstracts Service [CAS] 
Registry Number 64-17-5) in water at a nominal concentration of 0.02 % by mass.  SRM 2891is intended primarily 
for  use  in  the  calibration  of  instruments  and  techniques  used for the determination of ethanol in blood.  A unit of 
SRM 2891 consists of five 2-milliliter ampoules, each containing approximately 1.2 mL of solution. 
 
is  based  on  results  obtained 
Certified Mass Fraction of Ethanol:  The certified concentration value given below is based on results obtained 
from the gravimetric preparation of the solution and from the analytical results determined using gas chromatography 
and titrimetry.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy in that all 
known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or accounted for by NIST [1].  
 

7 

Ethanol Certified Mass Fraction:  0.01951 %  ±  0.00018 % 

Mass 

8 

1 

f  SK 

 
The results are expressed as the certified value ± the expanded uncertainty.  Certified values are unweighted means 
of concentrations determined by gravimetric preparation and chromatographic and titrimetric measurements [2].  The 
uncertainty listed with each value is an expanded uncertainty about the mean, with coverage factor 2 (approximately 
95 % confidence), calculated by combining a between-source variance incorporating inter-method bias with a pooled 
within-source  variance  following  the  ISO  and  NIST  Guides [3].    The  uncertainty  includes  both  correction  for 
estimated purity and allowance for differences among the concentrations determined by gravimetric preparation and 
chromatographic and titrimetric measurements. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2891 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until  30 April 2023,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this 
certificate (see “Instructions for Handling, Storage, and Use”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance  of  SRM  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If 
substantive  technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will 
notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
the  certification  of  this  SRM 
Coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  the  certification  of  this  SRM  was  under  the  direction  of 
2es 
M.M. Schantz and S.A. Wise of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Consultation  on  the  statistical  design  of  the  experimental  work  and  evaluation  of  the  data  were  provided  by 
S.D. Leigh of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 

Carlos A.  Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 
 
Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

Page 1 of 3 

Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
13
Certificate Issue Date:  11 April 2013 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

  

SRM 2891 

the 
Partial funding support for the preparation and certification of this Standard Reference Material was provided by the 
National Institute of Justice (NIJ) and managed through the NIST Office of Law Enforcement Standards (OLES). 
 
Preparation of and analytical measurements on the SRM were performed by J.V. Goodpaster and M.M. Schantz of 
the  NIST  Chemical  Sciences  Division  and  M.P. Cronise  and  C.N. Fales  of  the  Office  of  Reference  Materials.  
Additional analytical measurements were performed by M. Archer of the National Metrology Laboratory, Pretoria, 
South Africa. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
Handling:  The solution contains ethanol in water at the stated concentration.  Use proper disposal methods. 
 
Storage:  Sealed ampoules, as received, should be stored in the dark at temperatures between 10 °C and 30 °C. 
 
Use:    Sample  aliquots  for  analysis  should  be  withdrawn  immediately  after  opening  the  ampoules  and  should  be 
processed without delay for the certified concentration value to be valid within the stated uncertainty. Because of the 
volatility  of  ethanol,  the  certified  concentration  value  is  NOT  applicable  to  material  stored  in  ampoules  that  have 
been opened for more than 2 min, even if they are resealed. 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
The solution was prepared at NIST by weighing and mixing known masses of ethanol and organic-free water.  The 
solution  was  mixed  overnight  (a  minimum  of  16 h).    The  total  mass  of  the  solution  was  measured,  and  the 
concentration was calculated from this gravimetric procedure.  The gravimetric concentration was adjusted for the 
purity estimation of the ethanol, which was determined using flame ionization capillary gas chromatography with two 
stationary  phases  of  different  polarities,  differential  scanning  calorimetry,  and  Karl  Fischer  analysis  for  water 
content.    The  bulk  solution  was  chilled  slightly,  and  1.2 mL  aliquots  were  dispensed  into  2-milliliter amber  glass 
ampoules, which were then flame sealed. 
 
Aliquots  from  nine  ampoules,  selected  using  a  random  stratified  sampling  scheme,  were  analyzed  in  duplicate  by 
using  capillary  gas  chromatography  with  flame  ionization  detection  on  a  relatively  polar  DB-wax  column, 
15 m × 0.45 mm id,  0.85 µm  film  thickness  (Agilent  Technologies,  Wilmington, DE, USA).  The internal standard 
added  to  each  sample  for  quantification  purposes  was  1-propanol.    Calibration  solutions  consisting  of  weighed 
amounts of ethanol and the internal standard compound in organic-free water were chromatographically analyzed to 
determine analyte response factors.  
 
In addition, the concentration of the solution was determined at the National Metrology Laboratory (Pretoria, South 
Africa) using titrimetry.  The ethanol in known masses of the solutions was oxidized to acetic acid using a known 
mass  of  standard  potassium  dichromate  solution  in  the  presence  of  sulfuric  acid.    The  quantity  of  ethanol  in  the 
solution  was  determined  from  the  quantity  of  unreacted  potassium  dichromate  in  the  solution.    To  determine  the 
quantity of unreacted potassium dichromate, potassium iodide was added to the oxidized mixture, and the liberated 
iodine was titrated with a sodium thiosulfate solution.  Seven titrations were done for this solution.   

                                                           

(1)Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments,  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  certificate  in  order  to  specify 
this  certificate  in  order  to  specify
adequately  the  experimental  procedure.    Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  National 
Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology,  nor  does  it  imply  that  the  materials  or  equipment  identified  are  necessarily  the  best 
available for the purpose. 
 
SRM 2891 

Page 2 of 3 

in 

d 

REFERENCES 
 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
for 
Colbert, J.;  Gettings, R.;  MacDonald, B.;  Definitions  of  Terms  and  Modes  Used  at  NIST 
Value-Assignment  of  Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136; 
U.S. 
at 
http://www.nist.gov/srm/publications.cfm (accessed Apr 2013) 

Washington, DC 

Government 

available 

Printing 

(2000); 

Office: 

[3] 

[2]  Levenson, M.S.; Banks, D.L.; Eberhardt, K.R.; Gill, L.M.; Guthrie, W.F.; Liu, H.K.; Vangel, M.G.; Yen, J.H.; 
Zhang, N.F.;  An  Approach  to  Combining  Results  from  Multiple  Methods  Motivated  by  the  ISO  GUM; 
J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., Vol. 105, pp. 571-579 (2000). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(GUM 1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  April 2013);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results; NIST Technical Note 1297; U.S. Government Printing Office:  Washington, DC (1994); available at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed April 2013). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certificate Revision History:  11 April 2013 (Extended certification period; editorial changes); 26 March 2004 (Original certificate date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.  This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program:    telephone  (301)  975-2200;  fax  (301)  948-3730;  e-mail 
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 2891 

Page 3 of 3 

