 

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material 3255 
 
Green Tea (Camellia sinensis) Extract 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  validating  analytical  methods  for  the 
determination of catechins, xanthines, and elements in extracts of green tea (Camellia sinensis) and similar matrices.  
SRM 3255  can  also  be  used  for  quality  assurance  when  assigning  values  to  in-house  control  materials.   A  unit  of 
SRM 3255 consists of five packets, each containing approximately 1 g of extract. 
 
The  development  of  SRM 3255  was  a  collaboration  among 
the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and 
Technology (NIST), the National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements (NIH-ODS), and the Food and 
Drug Administration Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (FDA CDER). 
 
Certified Mass Fraction Values:  Certified mass fraction values of catechins, xanthines, and elements in SRM 3255, 
reported on a dry-mass basis, are provided in Tables 1 and 2.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has 
the highest confidence in its accuracy in that all known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken 
into account [1].  Analyses for value assignment were performed by NIST and collaborating laboratories.  Certified 
values of catechins and xanthines are the equally weighted means of the individual sets of results; certified values for 
elements were calculated as the mean of the mean values from NIST methods and the median of the means of results 
provided  by  collaborating  laboratories,  where  appropriate.    The  associated  uncertainties  are  expressed  at  an 
approximately 95 % level of confidence [2–4].   
 
Reference Mass Fraction Values:  Reference mass fraction values for epigallocatechin methylgallate, gallic acid, 
theanine, theophylline, and additional elements in SRM 3255, reported on a dry-mass basis, are provided in Tables 3 
and 4.  A NIST reference value is a noncertified value that is the best estimate of the true value based on available 
data; however, the values do not meet the NIST criteria for certification [1] and are provided with an uncertainty that 
may reflect only  measurement reproducibility,  may  not include all sources of uncertainty, or may reflect a lack of 
sufficient statistical agreement among multiple analytical methods.  The reference mass fraction values were derived 
from results reported by NIST or collaborating laboratories. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 3255 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until  30 June 2027,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this 
i,  contaminated,
certificate (see “Instructions for Storage and Use”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, 
or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination of the technical measurements leading to the certification of this SRM was performed by C.A. Rimmer, 
L.J. Wood, L.C. Sander, and S.A. Wise of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division; K.E. Sharpless of the NIST Special 
Programs Office; and W. Koshute and B. St. Amant of the Grocery Manufacturers Association (GMA, Washington, DC). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  09 February 2018 
Certificate Revision History on Page 6 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

3torage  and  Use”) 

 

Page 1 of 7 

  

SRM 3255 

55 

Foods 

Support  for  the  development  of  SRM 3255  was  provided  in  part  by NIH-ODS  and FDA CDER.    Technical 
consultation was provided by J.M. Betz (NIH-ODS) and A. Nguyen Pho (FDA CDER).  Acquisition of the material 
was coordinated by A. Nguyen Pho of FDA CDER and K.E. Sharpless of the NIST Special Programs Office.  
 
Analytical measurements were performed by M. Bedner, K.E. Murphy, B.J. Porter, M.C. Tims, and L.J. Wood of the 
NIST  Chemical  Sciences  Division  and  M. Payne  at  Hershey  Foods  Corporation  (Hershey, PA)  and  M. Roman  at 
Tampa Bay Analytical Research, Inc. (Largo, FL). 
 
Coordination of the distribution of materials and reporting of measurement results for an interlaboratory comparison 
exercise were performed by M.M. Phillips and L.J. Wood of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division and by W. Koshute 
and B. St. Amant of the GMA. Analysts at the following laboratories performed measurements that contributed to the 
value  assignment  of  elements  in  SRM 3255  as  part  of  a  GMA  Food  Industry  Analytical  Chemists  Share  Group 
(FIACSG)  interlaboratory  comparison  exercise:  Campbell  Soup  Company  (Camden, NJ);  ConAgra  Foods 
(Omaha, NE); Covance Inc. (Battle Creek, MI); Covance Inc. (Madison, WI); Covance (Asia) Pte. Ltd. (The Synergy, 
Singapore); Covance Inc. (Harrogate North Yorkshire, UK); Del Monte Foods (Walnut Creek, CA); Eurofins Central 
Analytical Laboratories (Metairie, LA); Eurofins Frontier Global Sciences (Bothell, WA); Eurofins Scientific (Des 
Moines, IA); Eurofins WEJ Contaminants GmbH (Hamburg, Germany); Land O’ Lakes (Arden Hills, MN); and NSF 
International (Ann Arbor, MI).   
 
Statistical analysis was provided by J.H. Yen of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Office  of  Reference
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
NOTICE TO USERS: SRM 3255 IS INTENDED FOR RESEARCH USE; NOT FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage:  The SRM should be stored at controlled room temperature (20 °C to 25 °C) in the original unopened packet 
until needed.  For elemental analyses, the packet can be re-sealed and test portions removed and analyzed until the 
material reaches its expiration date.  The stability of catechins, xanthines, and theanine in opened packets has not been 
investigated.  
 
Use:  Before use, the contents of a packet of material should be mixed thoroughly.  To relate analytical determinations 
to the certified values in this Certificate of Analysis, the test portion mass indicated in the description of the NIST 
analyses for each group of analytes below should be used (see “Source, Preparation, and Analysis”).  Test portions 
should be analyzed as received and results converted to a dry-mass basis.  The moisture conversion factor given below 
(see “Determination of Moisture”) can be used for the sample(s) when using an unopened packet for the first time. If 
using a previously opened and resealed packet, moisture must be determined using one of the recommended techniques 
(see “Determination of Moisture”).  Analytical results should include their own estimates of uncertainty and can be 
compared to the certified and reference values using procedures described in reference 6. 
 
Determination of Moisture:  Moisture content of SRM 3255 was determined at NIST by (1) freeze-drying to constant 
mass over 7 days; (2) drying over magnesium perchlorate in a desiccator at room temperature for 28 d; and (3) drying 
for  2 h  in  a  forced-air  oven  at  80 °C.    Unweighted  results  obtained  using  all  three  techniques  were  averaged  to 
determine a conversion factor of (0.9687 ± 0.0055) gram dry-mass per gram as-received mass,  which  was used to 
convert data from an as-received to a dry-mass basis; the uncertainty shown on this value is an expanded uncertainty 
(k = 2) to represent a 95 % level of confidence.  An uncertainty component for the conversion factor (0.28 %) obtained 
from the moisture measurements is incorporated in the uncertainties of the certified and reference values, reported on 
a dry-mass basis, that are provided in this certificate. 
 
SOURCE, PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
Source and Preparation:  The material for production of SRM 3255 is a green tea extract of 90 % polyphenols. The 
material was prepared by first extracting dried green tea leaves in 50 % alcohol/water (volume fraction), filtering and 
vacuum evaporating.  The next extraction step was in ethyl acetate followed again by vacuum extraction then spray 
drying.   The  material  was  blended  and  received  as  nominally  180 μm  (80 mesh)  particle  size  and  was  packaged 

d  thoroughly 

                                                 

(1)Certain  commercial  instruments,  materials,  or  processes  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, nor does it imply that the instruments, materials, or processes identified are necessarily the best available for the 
purpose. 
SRM 3255 

Page 2 of 7 

without  additional  grinding.    The  extract  was  transferred  to  High-Purity Standards  (Charleston, SC)  where  it  was 
blended, aliquoted, and heat-sealed inside nitrogen-flushed 4 mil polyethylene bags, which were then sealed inside 
nitrogen-flushed aluminized plastic bags along with two packets of silica gel each.  Following packaging, SRM 3255 
was irradiated (Neutron Products, Inc., Dickerson, MD) to an absorbed dose of 7.9 kGy to 9.5 kGy.   
 
Analytical Approach for Determination of Catechins, Gallic Acid, Xanthines, and Theanine:  Value assignment 
of  the  mass  fractions  of  the  catechins,  gallic  acid,  and  xanthines  in  SRM 3255  was  based  on  the  combination  of 
measurements provided by NIST using liquid chromatography (LC) with ultraviolet absorbance detection (UV) and 
LC  with  mass  spectrometry (MS),  and  by  data  provided  by  collaborating  laboratories  using  LC  with  fluorescence 
detection (LC/FL) and LC/UV.  NIST provided theanine measurements using LC/MS. 
 
NIST Analyses for Catechins and Xanthines using LC/UV:  The mass fractions of catechins, caffeine and theobromine 
were measured by LC/UV in 20 mg to 75 mg test portions taken from each of six packets of SRM 3255.  Test portions 
were  combined  with  7-(β-hydroxypropyl)theophylline  (proxyphylline)  as  an  internal  standard  and  dissolved  in 
methanol and water by shaking for 1 min.  Samples were analyzed by LC/UV with a C18 column and absorbance 
detection at 210 nm.  A typical separation is provided in Figure A1.  Calibrants were prepared gravimetrically, and a 
single  internal  standard  solution  was  used  for  the  calibrants  and  samples.   A  series  of  three  calibrants  containing 
varying analyte levels was used. 
 
NIST Analyses for Catechins using LC/UV and LC/MS:  The mass fractions of catechins were measured by LC/UV 
and LC/MS in duplicate 20 mg test portions taken from each of six packets of SRM 3255.  Test portions were dissolved 
in methanol and water by ultrasonic agitation for 5 min. A C18 column was used with absorbance detection at 280 nm 
and a mass spectrometer with electrospray ionization source (ESI) connected in series.  Selected ion monitoring was 
used for quantitation at m/z 171 for gallic acid (GA), m/z 239 for proxyphylline (internal standard; IS), m/z 291 for 
catechin (C)  and  epicatechin (EC),  m/z 307  for  gallocatechin (GC)  and  epigallocatechin (EGC),  m/z 443  for 
epicatechin  gallate (ECG),  and  m/z 459  for  gallocatechin  gallate (GCG)  and  epigallocatechin  gallate (EGCG).   A 
typical separation is provided in Figure A1. Calibrants were prepared gravimetrically, and a single internal standard 
solution was used for the calibrants and samples.  A series of four calibrants were prepared at levels approximating 
the values expected in the SRM. 
 
NIST  Analyses  for  Xanthines  using  LC/UV  and  LC/MS:    The  mass  fractions  of  caffeine  and  theophylline  were 
measured by LC/UV and LC/MS in duplicate 45 mg test portions taken from each of six packets of SRM 3255.  Test 
portions  were  individually  combined  with  an  internal  standard  solution  containing  trimethyl-13C3-caffeine  and 
13C15N2-theophylline, methanol, and water.  Materials were extracted using ultrasonic agitation for 2 h.  Samples were 
syringe-filtered  prior  to  LC/MS  analysis.    A  C18  column  and  ESI  in  positive  polarity  were  used.  Selected  ion 
monitoring  was  used  for  quantitation  at  m/z 198  for  labeled  caffeine,  m/z 195  for  caffeine,  m/z 184  for  labeled 
theophylline,  and  m/z 181  for  theophylline.    Calibrants  were  prepared  gravimetrically,  at  levels  intended  to 
approximate the levels of the xanthines in the SRM.  A single internal standard solution was used for the calibrants 
and samples.   
 
NIST  Analyses  for  Xanthines  and  Theanine  using  LC/UV  and  LC/MS:  The  mass  fractions  of  theobromine  and 
theanine [7]  were  measured  by  LC/UV  and  LC/MS  in  duplicate  100 mg  test  portion  sizes  taken  from  each  of  six 
packets  of  SRM 3255.    Test  portions  were  individually  combined  with  an  internal  standard  solution  containing 
2H6-theobromine  and  2H5-L-theanine,  methanol,  and  phosphate  buffer  in  water.    Materials  were  extracted  using 
ultrasonic agitation for 2 h. Samples were syringe-filtered prior to LC/MS analysis.  A C18 column and ESI in positive 
polarity were used.  Selected ion monitoring was used for quantitation at m/z 187 for labeled theobromine, m/z 181 
for theobromine, m/z 180 for labeled theanine, and m/z 175 for theanine. Calibrants were prepared gravimetrically, at 
levels intended to approximate the levels of the theanine in the SRM.  A single internal standard solution was used for 
the calibrants and samples.   
 
Analyses for Elements:  For analytes that were measured by NIST, duplicate 0.5 g test portions from a single packet 
of SRM 3255 were analyzed using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS).  Samples were digested 
in a microwave sample preparation system using HNO3 and HF.  The GMA FIACC laboratories prepared samples 
using  a  microwave  sample  preparation  system  with  analyses  by  either  ICP-MS  or  atomic  absorption 
spectroscopy (AAS).  
 
Collaborating Laboratories’ Analyses:  Hershey Foods analyzed 250 mg test portions from each of six packets for 
catechin, epicatechin, caffeine, and theobromine using sonication, and analyzed extracts by using LC/FL (catechins) 
or LC/UV at 280 nm (xanthines).  Tampa Bay Analytical Research analyzed 150 mg test portions in triplicate from 
each of five packets for catechins and caffeine using sonication.  Extracts were analyzed by using LC-UV.  The GMA 
FIACC laboratories were asked to use their usual methods to make single measurements of elements on test portions 
taken  from  each  of  two  packets  of  SRM 3255.    Because  of  variability  among  data  provided  by  laboratories 

SRM 3255 

Page 3 of 7 

participating in an interlaboratory comparison exercise, the median of laboratory means was used, with the uncertainty 
estimated using the median absolute deviation (MADe) [8]. 
 
Homogeneity Assessment:  The homogeneity of catechins, xanthines, and theanine was assessed at NIST using the 
methods  and  test  portion  sizes  described  above.    Analysis  of  variance  did  not  show  statistically  significant 
heterogeneity.  Other analytes have been treated as though they are homogeneously distributed in the material although 
the homogeneity of only the catechins, xanthines, and theanine was assessed. 
 
Value Assignment:  For calculation of assigned values for catechins, xanthines, and theanine, the equally weighted 
mean of results provided by NIST, and the individual means of collaborating laboratories’ data, where available, were 
used to calculate assigned values.  In cases where data were provided using two detectors in series, the average was 
treated as a single method mean when it was combined with other data.  The GMA FIACC laboratories reported the 
individual  results  for  each  of  their  analyses  for  a  given  analyte.    The  mean  of  each  laboratory’s  results  was  then 
determined.  For calculation of assigned values for analytes that were measured only by the collaborating laboratories, 
the  median of  the laboratory  means  was  used.   For analytes that  were also  measured by NIST, the  median of the 
individual  collaborating  laboratory  means  and  the  mean  of  the  individual  sets  of  NIST  data  were  averaged,  as 
appropriate. 
 
1 
Certified Mass Fraction Values for Catechins and Xanthines:  Each certified mass fraction value is the combined 
mean from each set of analyses by NIST and the mean of results provided by collaborating laboratories.  Values are 
Values  are 
expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the certified value and U95%(x) is the expanded uncertainty of the certified value.  
To  propagate 
The true value of the analyte is believed to lie within the interval x ± U95%(x) with 95 % confidence.  To propagate 
this uncertainty, treat the certified value as a normally distributed random variable with mean x and standard deviation 
U95%(x)/2 [2–4].   The  measurand  is  the  total  mass  fraction  for  each  analyte  listed  in  Table 1  on  a  dry-mass  basis.  
Metrological traceability is to the SI derived unit for mass fraction (expressed as milligrams per gram). 
 

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fraction Values for Catechins and Xanthines in SRM 3255 

Iass  Fraction 

Xanthines 

 

 

(+)-catechin (a,b,c,d) 
(–)-epicatechin (a,b,c,d) 
(–)-epicatechin gallate (a,b,d)  
(–)-epigallocatechin (a,b,d)  
(–)-epigallocatechin gallate (a,b,d)  
(–)-gallocatechin (a,b,d)  
(–)-gallocatechin gallate (a,b,d)  
 
Caffeine (a,b,c,d) 
theobromine (a,b,c) 

Mass Fraction  
(mg/g) 

0.93 
6.7 
7.8 
6.5 

9.17  ± 
± 
± 
± 
±  19 
± 
± 

47.3 
100.3 
81.8 
422 
22.0 
39.0 

1.7 
2.0 

36.9 

± 
0.867  ± 

2.7 
0.076 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(a) NIST LC/UV 
(b) NIST LC/MS 
(c) Collaborating Laboratories LC/FL 
(d) Collaborating Laboratories LC/UV 
 
 
Certified Mass Fraction Values for Elements:  Each certified mass fraction value is the combined mean from each 
set of analyses by NIST using ICP-MS and the median of the mean of results provided by collaborating laboratories.  
Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the certified value and U95%(x) is the expanded uncertainty of the 
certified value.  The true value of the analyte is believed to lie within the interval x ± U95%(x) with 95 % confidence.  
To propagate this uncertainty, treat the certified value as a normally distributed random variable  with  mean x and 
standard deviation U95%(x)/2 [2–4].  The measurand is the total mass fraction for each element listed in Table 2 on a 
dry-mass  basis.    Metrological  traceability  is  to  the  SI  derived  unit  for  mass  fraction  (expressed  as  milligrams per 
kilogram). 
 

Table 2.  Certified Mass Fraction Values for Elements in SRM 3255 
 

Elements

 

Arsenic (As) 
Lead (Pb) 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

 
 

0.1624  ±  0.0079 
0.0832  ±  0.0031 

SRM 3255 

Page 4 of 7 

Reference Mass Fraction Values for Catechins, Xanthines, and Theanine:  Each reference mass fraction value is 
the combined mean from the means of results from each set of analyses by NIST. Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), 
where x is the estimated value and U95%(x) is the expanded uncertainty of the value.  The method-specific true value 
of the analyte is believed to lie within the interval x ± U95%(x) with about a 95 % confidence [2–4].  The measurand is 
the  mass  fraction  for  analytes  listed  in  Table 3,  on  a  dry-mass  basis,  as  determined  by  the  methods  indicated.  
Metrological traceability is to mass fraction (expressed as milligrams per gram), as realized by the methods used. 
 

Table 3.  Reference Mass Fraction Values for Epigallocatechin Methylgallate, Gallic Acid, 
Theanine, and Theophylline in SRM 3255  
 

 

(–)-epigallocatechin methylgallate(a) 
gallic acid(a,b) 
L-theanine(b) 
theophylline(b) 

 
 
 
 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/g) 

6.87  ±  0.44 
3.231  ±  0.086 
0.340  ±  0.008 
0.087  ±  0.002 

(a) NIST LC/UV  
(b) NIST LC/MS   
 
 
Reference Mass Fraction Values for Elements:  Each reference mass fraction value is the median of the mean results 
provided by collaborating laboratories using ICP-MS or AAS.  Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the 
estimated value and U95%(x) is the expanded uncertainty of the value.  The method-specific true value of the analyte 
is believed to lie within the interval x ± U95%(x) with about a 95 % confidence [2–4].  The measurand is the mass 
.  Metrological
fraction for each element listed in Table 4, on a dry-mass basis, as determined by the method indicated.  Metrological 
traceability is to mass fraction (expressed as milligrams per kilogram) as realized by the method used. 
 

Table 4.  Reference Mass Fraction Values for Elements in SRM 3255  
 

 

Aluminum (Al) 
Copper (Cu) 
Iron (Fe) 
Manganese (Mn) 
Zinc (Zn) 

Mass Fraction  
(mg/kg) 

±  9.6 

  86.9 
  6.16    ±  0.10 
  14.04  ±  0.52 
  58.4 
±  2.5 
  5.29  ±  0.41 

 

 
 
 
 

 

SRM 3255 

Page 5 of 7 

REFERENCES 
 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of 
Reference Materials for Chemical Measurements; NIST Special Publication 260-136; U.S. Government Printing 
Office:  Washington, DC  (2000);  available  at  http://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF  (accessed  Feb 
2018). 

[2]  JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(GUM  1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Feb  2018);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/tn1297/index.cfm (accessed Feb 2018). 

[3]  JCGM 101:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data – Supplement 1 to the Guide to Expression of Uncertainty in 
Measurement  -  Propagation  of  Distributions  Using  a  Monte  Carlo  Method;  JCGM (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_101_2008_E.pdf (accessed Feb 2018). 
[4]  Efron, B.; Tibshirani, R.J.; An Introduction to the Bootstrap; Chapman & Hall, London, UK (1993). 
[5]  Thompson, A.;  Taylor, B.N.;  Guide  for  the  Use  of  the  International  System  of  Units  (SI);  NIST  Special 
at 

Publication 811;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington,  DC 
http://physics.nist.gov/cuu/pdf/sp811.pdf (accessed Feb 2018). 

available 

(2008); 

[6]  Sharpless, K.E.; Duewer, D.L.; Standard Reference Materials for Analysis of Dietary Supplements; J. AOAC Int., 

Vol. 91, pp. 1298–1302 (2008). 

[7]  Bedner, M.;  Sander, L.C.;  Sharpless, K.E.;  An  LC-ESI/MS  Method  for  Determining  Theanine  in  Green  Tea 

Dietary Supplements; Anal. Bioanal. Chem., Vol. 397, pp. 1773–1777 (2010). 

(1981). 
[8]  Huber, P.J; Robust Statistics; John Wiley:  New York (1981). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Certificate  Revision  History:    09 February 2018  (Addition  of  elemental  values,  change  of  expiration  date,  editorial  changes); 
30 December 2015  (Editorial  changes);  04 September 2015  (Change  of  expiration  date;  editorial  changes);15 November 2010  (Original 
certificate date) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by 
(301) 948-3730;  
telephone 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 
 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

contacting 

fax 

SRM 3255 

Page 6 of 7 

 

e
c
n
a
b
r
o
s
b
A

e
c
n
a
b
r
o
s
b
A

  

  

G
C
G
E

C
E

    

G
C
E

e
m
G
C
G
E

G
C
G

1
-

C

60

Appendix A 

C
G
E

40

G
C
G
E

Time (min)

C
G

B
T

f
a
C

S

I

C

  

0

10

20

30

50

70

A
G

C
G
  

0

10

C
G
E

C

20

 

  

C
E

30
Time (min)

G
C
G

40

G
C
E

50

60

 

 
Figure A1.  Chromatograms showing separation of catechins, gallic acid, and caffeine using Catechin Method 1 (top) 
and  Catechin  Method 2 (bottom).    For  Catechin  Method 1,  an  Ace C18  ultra  inert  column  (250 mm × 4.6 mm, 
5 µm particle size; MAC-MOD Analytical, Chadds Ford, PA) was held at 23 °C.  The separation was performed using 
a  gradient  consisting  of  water,  acetonitrile,  and  methanol,  each  containing  acetic  acid.    The  solvent  composition 
reached  full  elution  strength  at  75 min.    Absorbance  detection  was  at  210 nm.    For  Catechin Method 2,  a 
Zorbax Eclipse XDB-C18 column (250 mm × 4.6 mm, 5 µm particle size; Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA) was 
used.  The separation was performed using a gradient of water and acetonitrile, both containing 0.1 % formic acid 
(volume fraction).  Absorbance detection  was at 280 nm; data were also generated using MS  with ESI in positive 
polarity  in  series  with  the  absorbance  detector  (chromatograms  not  shown).    Abbreviations:    procyanidin 
trimer C1 (C-1),  caffeine (Caf),  catechin (C),  epicatechin (EC),  epicatechin  gallate (ECG),  epigallocatechin (EGC), 
epigallocatechin  gallate (EGCG),  epigallocatechin  methylgallate (EGCGme),  gallic  acid (GA),  gallocatechin (GC), 
gallocatechin gallate (GCG), proxyphylline (internal standard; IS), and theobromine (TB). 
 

 

S

I

  

SRM 3255 

Page 7 of 7 

