National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material® 3279 
 
Chromium Dietary Supplement 

six 

ety  compliance 
ve 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended for use in the evaluation of chemical methods of analysis for 
testing 
chromium and vanadium to support chemical exposure and safety compliance measurements associated with testing 
oral  dietary  supplements.    A  unit  of  SRM 3279  consists  of  five  pouches,  each  containing  six  grams  of  powdered 
material, individually sealed in nitrogen-flushed Mylar® bags.  
 
The  development  of  SRM 3279  was  a  collaboration  between  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and 
Technology (NIST) and the National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements (NIH-ODS). 
 
Certified Mass Fraction Value:  A certified mass fraction value for chromium (Cr), reported on a dry-mass basis, is 
provided in Table 1.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy in 
that all known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [1].  The certified value for 
Cr was calculated as a variance weighted mean, based on the mean value obtained using inductively coupled plasma 
mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) calibrated with the method of standard additions at NIST [2], and the weighted mean of 
individual results provided by the collaborating laboratories listed in Appendix A.   
 
Reference Value Mass Fraction:  A reference mass fraction value for vanadium (V), reported on a dry-mass basis, 
is provided in Table 2.  A NIST reference value is a noncertified value that is the best estimate of the true value based 
on  available  data;  however,  such  values  do  not  meet  the  NIST  criteria  for  certification  and  are  provided  with  an 
uncertainty where all known or suspected sources of bias have not been fully investigated [1].  The reference value 
for  V  is  based  on  the  mean  value  obtained  using  a  single  NIST  method (ICP-MS)  calibrated  with  the  method  of 
standard additions.   
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 3279 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until  01 April 2029,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  instructions  given  in  this 
certificate (see “Instructions for Handling, Storage, and Use”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
icate,  NIST  will  notify  the
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination of the technical measurements leading to certification of this SRM was provided by S.J. Christopher and 
L.J. Wood of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division.   
 
Analytical  measurements  were  performed  by  S.J. Christopher  and  W.C. Davis  of  the  NIST  Chemical  Sciences 
Division. 
 
Statistical consultation and analyses were performed by C.R. Hagwood of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Material production was coordinated by A.J. Moors, R.S. Pugh, J. Rhoderick, J.M. Ness, D. Peterson, and S.E. Long 
of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division.  
 
Material acquisition was coordinated by K.E. Sharpless of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  10 October 2019 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 
 
Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

 

Page 1 of 7 

  

SRM 3279 

packaging 

 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
interlaboratory 
Analysts  at  many  collaborating  laboratories (Appendix  A)  analyzed  SRM 3279  as  part  of  an  interlaboratory 
comparison exercise coordinated by NIST. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
NOTICE TO USERS: SRM 3279 IS INTENDED FOR RESEARCH USE; NOT FOR HUMAN OR ANIMAL 
CONSUMPTION. 
 
Handling:    The  material  may  contain  constituents  of  unknown  toxicity,  and  the  fine  powder  may  aerosolize, 
presenting an inhalation or dermal irritation risk.  Caution and care should be exercised during SRM handling and use.  
 
Storage:  The SRM should be stored in its original packaging under normal laboratory conditions and kept away from 
sunlight and intense sources of heat or radiation.  
 
Use:  Prior to removal of test portions for analysis, the packet should be positioned horizontally and mixed thoroughly 
by shaking in the horizontal plane for approximately 1 minute.  The packet should be allowed to rest briefly after 
shaking (approximately 1 minute) to allow for suspended particles to settle, after which the packet should be opened 
slowly  to  minimize  aerosolizing  material  contents.    A  minimum  test  portion  mass  of  0.25 g  was  used  for  total 
chromium and vanadium mass fraction determinations.  NIST cannot guarantee the suitability of using smaller test 
portions for total mass fraction determinations.  Test portions should be analyzed as received and results converted to 
a dry-mass basis.  The moisture conversion factor given below (see “Moisture Determination”) can be used for the 
sample(s) when using an unopened packet for the first time.  If using a previously opened and resealed packet, moisture 
must be determined using the recommended technique.   
 
MATERIAL SOURCE, PREPARATION, AND HOMOGENEITY TESTING(1) 
 
Material Source and Preparation:  The source material for SRM 3279 was derived from two commercially available 
chromium  dietary  supplements  listing  chromium  in  the  chemical  forms  of  chromium  picolinate  and  chromium 
polynicotinate.  Approximately 4 kg of material was blended and homogenized into a fine powder using a Teflon® 
disk mill.  The homogenized material was passed through a US No. 45 mesh (0.354 mm) sieve, pooled, and further 
blended for final production. 
 
Homogeneity Testing:    Material  homogeneity  was  assessed before  and  after  final  packaging of  SRM 3279 using 
acid-assisted 
emission 
by 
spectroscopy (ICP-OES).  The mass fraction relative standard deviations for six samples drawn from across the entire 
SRM 3279 production lot were under 1 % for chromium and under 2 % for vanadium.  Interlaboratory comparison 
data for chromium were used as further verification of material homogeneity.  Sample test portions of 0.25 g indicated 
no material heterogeneity during the value assignment of total Cr and V using ICP-MS. 
 
MOISTURE DETERMINATION 
 
Moisture  Determination:  Eight  nominal  1 g  samples  of  SRM  3279 were dried  in a  gravity  convection oven for 
2 h (set point = 110 °C) to drive off residual moisture.  Dried samples were stored in glass weighing containers in a 
vacuum desiccator containing calcium sulfate to facilitate sample cooling prior to weighing.  A mean dry mass/wet 
mass conversion factor of 0.92466 ± 0.00020 (1 standard deviation) was used to establish the dry mass fraction values 
reported in Tables 1 and 2. 
 
MASS FRACTION VALUES 
 
Certified Mass Fraction Value for Chromium:  The certified mass fraction value given in Table 1 is the combined 
variance weighted mean of the mean result from the set of analyses by NIST and the weighted mean of results provided 
by collaborating laboratories.  The value is expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the certified value and U95%(x) is the 
expanded  uncertainty  of  the  certified  value.    The  true  value  of  the  analyte  is  believed  to  lie  within  the  interval 
                                                           

SRM
optical 

decomposition 

inductively 

followed 

coupled 

plasma 

sample 

(1)  Certain  commercial  instruments,  materials,  or  processes  are  identified  in  this  report  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental  procedures.    Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  National  Institute  of 
Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the instruments, materials, or processes identified are necessarily the best available 
for the purpose. 

SRM 3279 

 

Page 2 of 7 

x ± U95%(x) with 95 % confidence.  To propagate this uncertainty, treat the certified value as a normally distributed 
random variable with mean x and standard deviation U95%(x)/2 [3, 4].  The measurand is the total mass fraction for Cr 
on a dry-mass basis.  Metrological traceability is to the derived SI unit for mass fraction, as realized through the purity 
determined for the primary chemical standards employed in the NIST chromium calibrator solutions of SRM 3112a 
Chromium (Cr) Standard Solution [5].   
 
 

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fraction Value for Chromium 

Chromium (Cr) 

1299 mg/kg  ±  15 mg/kg 

 
 
 
Reference Mass Fraction Value for Vanadium:  The reference mass fraction value given in Table 2 is the mean 
result from the set of analyses by NIST.  The value is expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the reference value and 
U95%(x) is the expanded uncertainty of the value.  The method-specific value of the analyte is believed to lie within 
the interval x ± U95%(x) with 95 % confidence. To propagate this uncertainty, treat the reference value as a normally 
distributed random variable with mean x and standard deviation U95%(x)/2 [3, 4].  The measurand is the total mass 
fraction for V on a dry-mass basis.  Metrological traceability is to the derived SI unit for mass fraction, as realized 
through the purity determined for the primary chemical standards employed in the NIST vanadium calibrator solutions 
of SRM 3165 Vanadium (V) Standard Solution [6]. 
 
 

Table 2.  Reference Mass Fraction Value for Vanadium 

Vanadium (V) 

 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION 
 
Supplemental Information:  Information is provided below on the chemical speciation of chromium in SRM 3279.  
The chromium in SRM 3279 is derived from chromium (III) picolinate and chromium (III) nicotinate (Fig. 1), based 
on the label contents of the SRM source materials.   
 

2032 mg/kg  ±  37 mg/kg 

 
°

aN

  

 
Figure 1.  Chromium (III) Picolinate (left) and Chromium (III) Nicotinate (right). 
 
 
Often dietary supplements are tested for the presence of toxic hexavalent chromium, Cr (VI), which is difficult to 
measure accurately.  This material is expected to be low in native Cr (VI) species, based on the Cr speciation of the 
parent compounds comprising the SRM.  At the time of measurement at NIST, the extractable Cr (VI) mass fraction 
was observed to be less than an estimated limit of detection (LOD) of 16 micrograms per kilogram.  The method used 
to determine the LOD value for extractable Cr (VI) is summarized below.  Analytical methods, reaction conditions 
and certain material substrates can lead to redox transformation of Cr species during laboratory sample preparation.  
The  estimated  LOD  value  for  extractable  Cr (VI)  may  be  of  use  when  validating  methods  of  analytical  testing  of 
dietary supplements for product safety, and for assistance with uncovering matrix-dependent or sample preparation 
method-dependent factors that could lead to interconversion of Cr (III and VI) species in the laboratory.  
 
 

 

SRM 3279 

 

Page 3 of 7 

Method  Description:    Extractable  Cr (VI)  was  determined  for  SRM 3279  using  a  microwave-assisted  extraction 
method  similar  to  one  that  has  been  documented  to  minimize  the  transformation  of  Cr  species  during  chemical 
extraction  [7].    Chemical  extraction  was  accomplished  in  35  mL  glass  vessels,  using  a  Discover  SP  microwave 
system (CEM,  Matthews,  NC).    The  extraction  solvent  was  aqueous  50 mmol/L  ethylenediaminetetraacetic 
acid (EDTA) solution (prepared from disodium EDTA salt, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Mo) adjusted to a pH of 10.  
The pH of the EDTA solution was adjusted through dropwise addition of high purity Optima grade (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific, Waltham, MA) ammonium hydroxide (30 % w/w) while monitoring pH changes with a commercial pH 
meter.  Six test portions of SRM 3279 (one nominal 50 mg test portion from each of six individual SRM packets) were 
combined with varying amounts of Cr (VI) ranging from 0 µg to 25 µg and extracted in 5 mL of extractant solution 
using the microwave program in Table 3.  
 

Table 3.  Microwave Extraction Program used for Cr Speciation Experiments 
 

Stage 

Temperature 
(°C) 

Ramp Time 
(min) 

Hold Time 
(min) 

Pressure 
(psi) 

Power 
(W) 

Air Cooling 

Stirring 

1 
2 
3 

90 
25 
110 

1 
0 
1 

5 
10 
5 

250 
250 
250 

200 
0 
200 

On 
On 
On 

Hi 
Hi 
Hi 

 
Samples  were  stirred  with  a  Teflon®  coated  stir  bar  during  microwave  irradiation  to  increase  the  Cr  extraction 
efficiency.    This  microwave  extraction  methodology  has  been  shown  to  be  effective  in  minimizing  Cr  species 
interconversion  reactions  during  microwave  extraction  of  solid  samples [7].    The  resultant  sample  extracts  were 
diluted gravimetrically 1:10 with water to match the mobile phase (5 mmol/L EDTA, pH 10) prior to chromatographic 
analysis.  Chromatographic analysis was conducted using a Dionex (Sunnyvale, CA) ICS-3000 ion chromatography 
system  coupled  to  an  Agilent (Santa  Clara,  CA)  8800  QQQ-ICP-MS.    Chromatography  settings  are  tabulated  in 
Table 4.   
 

Table 4.  Chromatographic System Program Settings and Column Parameters for Cr Speciation Experiments 
 
Run Time 
(s) 

Separation 
Type 

Flow Rate 
(mL/min) 

Mobile  
Phase 

Dimensions 

Mobile 
Phase pH 

Column 

Injection 
Volume 
(µL) 

Dionex 
AS9-HC 

2 mm x 250 mm 

10 

1140 

0.250 

Isocratic 

10 

5 mM 
EDTA 

of  the  QQQ

 
 
Cr  interferences (mainly  40Ar12C+)  were  mitigated  by  using  the  oxygen  mass  shift  mode  of  the  QQQ-ICP-MS  to 
measure 52Cr+ as the molecular oxide (52Cr16O+). 
 
Initial method development studies utilized Cr picolinate, 53Cr (III) and Cr (VI) standards (with and without subjection 
to  microwave  extraction)  to  identify  chemical  species  through  retention  time  matching  and  to  track  the  chemical 
conversion of species.  The chemical extraction data for standards showed minimal interspecies conversion.  However, 
when Cr (VI) was microwave extracted in the presence of 50 mg of SRM 3279, some of the Cr (VI) was converted to 
Cr (III).    This  is  likely  due  to  the  electron-rich  Cr  picolinate/polynicotinate  matrix  substrate  donating  electrons  to 
Cr (VI).  A series of chromatograms is presented in Figure 2 for microwave extraction of varying levels of added 
Cr (VI)  while  holding  the  mass  of  SRM 3279  constant.    For  determination  of  an  extractable  Cr (VI)  value,  the 
matrix-induced species interconversion required the accounting of three peaks: Cr picolinate/nicotinate, designated as 
Cr (Nic), Cr (III) and Cr (VI).  The zero-addition standard level chromatogram (see Figure 2) indicated that there was 
a negligible amount of native extractable Cr (VI) in SRM 3279. The Cr (Nic) and Cr (III) peak areas increased as a 
function  of  added  Cr (VI).    Stacked  integrated  peak  areas  from  the  chromatograms  were  used  to  construct  a  total 
extractable Cr calibration curve.  The calibration curve was then used to estimate a Hubaux-Vos limit of detection 
value [8, 9] for total extractable chromium, using a 99 % confidence level.  The total extractable mass fraction of 
Cr (VI) was subsequently estimated as a percentage of the total extractable Cr, using the quotient of the peak area of 
Cr (VI) to total peak area, at the zero-addition standard level.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SRM 3279 

 

Page 4 of 7 

400000 

350000  ; 

300000  + 

 
)
S
P
C
(

 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I

 
*
O
,
,
r
C
2
5

250000 

200000 

150000 

100000 

50000 

 
 
 

 
 

  

   Baseline  (no  SRM  3279) 

—  -  -SRM  3279  +  0  ug/g  Cr(VI) 

—-- 

SRM  3279  +  0.018  pg/g  Cr(VI) 

wo---  SRM  3279  +  0.045  yg/g  Cr(VI) 

—  —SRM  3279  +  0.096  g/g  Cr(VI) 

—  —SRM  3279  +  0.194  yg/g  Cr(VI) 

wo---  SRM  3279  +  0.488  yg/g  Cr(VI) 

Cr (III) 

 
,
=
=

    
  

 
e
a

800 

1000 

1200 

1400 

1600 

1800 

2000

Retention  Time  (s) 

 

 
Figure 2.  Chromatographic Series for Six (50 mg) Samples of SRM 3279 Spiked with Varying Levels 
of Cr (VI) and Subjected to Microwave Extraction at pH = 10.  The peaks are designated as chromium 
nicotinate,  Cr (Nic),  and  chromium  Cr (III)  or  Cr (VI).    Intensity  data  are  shown  as  counts  per 
second (CPS). 
 

 

SRM 3279 

 

Page 5 of 7 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of 
Reference Materials for Chemical Measurements; NIST Special Publication 260-136 U.S. Government Printing 
Office:  Washington, DC  (2000);  available  at  https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/srm/SP260-
136.PDF (accessed Oct 2019). 

[2]  Christopher, S.J.; Day, R.D.; Bryan, C.E.; Turk, G.C.; Improved Calibration Strategy for Measurement of Trace 
Elements in Biological and Clinical Whole Blood Reference Materials via Collision-Cell Inductively Coupled 
Plasma Mass Spectrometry; J. Anal. At. Spectrom. Vol. 20, pp. 1035–1043 (2005). 

[3   JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data - Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement; 
(GUM 1995  with  Minor  Corrections),  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology (JCGM)  (2008);  available  at 
https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Oct 2019);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
https://www.nist.gov/pml/nist-technical-note-1297 (accessed Oct 2019). 

[4]  Thompson, A.;  Taylor, B.N.;  Guide  for  the  Use  of  the  International  System  of  Units (SI);  NIST  Special 
at 

Printing  Office:  Washington, DC 

Publication 811;  U.S.  Government 
https://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/sp811/index.cfm (accessed Oct 2019). 

available 

(2008); 

[5]  SRM  3112a;  Chromium (Cr)  Standard  Solution;  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology;  

U.S. Department of Commerce: Gaithersburg, MD (25 January 2018) available at  
https://www-s.nist.gov/srmors/view_detail.cfm?srm=3112A (accessed Oct 2019). 

 
[6]  SRM  3165;  Vanadium (V)  Standard  Solution National 

Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology;  

U.S. Department of Commerce: Gaithersburg, MD (05 July 2017) available at  
https://www-s.nist.gov/srmors/view_detail.cfm?srm=3165 (accessed Oct 2019). 

 
[7]  Fabregat-Cabello,  N.; Rodríguez-González, P.; Castillo, A.; Malherbe, J.; Roig-Navarro, A.; Long, S.; Ignacio 
Garcia Alonso, J.; Fast and Accurate Procedure for the Determination of Cr (VI) in Solid Samples by Isotope 
dilution Mass Spectrometry; Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012, 46, 12542-12549. 

[8]  Hubaux, A.;  Vos, G.;  Decision  and  Detection  Limits  for  Linear  Calibration  Curves;  Anal.  Chem.,  Vol. 42, 

Vol.

849-855 (1970). 

[9]  Coleman, D.;  Vanatta, L.;  Statistics  in  Analytical  Chemistry:  Part  34—Detection-Limit  Summary;  available  at 

https://www.americanlaboratory.com/914-Application-Notes/1106-Part-34-Detection-Limit-Summary/; 
(accessed Oct 2019). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting 
fax (301)  948-3730;  e-mail 
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm.  
 
 

telephone (301)  975-2200; 

the  SRM  Program: 

 

SRM 3279 

 

Page 6 of 7 

Appendix A 
 
NIST Interlaboratory Comparison List of Participating Laboratories 

 

ABCO Laboratories, Inc., Fairfield, CA 
Access Business Group (Nutrilite), Buena Park, CA 
Advanced Botanical Consulting & Testing, Inc., Tustin, CA 
Advanced Laboratories Inc, South Salt Lake City, UT 
ALS Environmental, Salt Lake City, UT 
Amway, Ada, MI 
Apex Analytical Laboratory, Tempe, AZ 
Arizona Nutritional Supplements, Chandler, AZ 
Atlas Bioscience Labs, Tucson, AZ 
Brooks Applied Labs, Bothell, WA 
California Department of Public Health, Food and Drug Laboratory, Richmond, CA 
Chemical Solutions LTD, Harrisburg, PA 
Covance Food Solutions, Boulder, CO 
Eurofins - Nutrition Analysis Center, Des Moines, IA 
Eurofins Frontier Global Sciences, Inc, Bothell, WA 
Eurofins Steins Laboratorium, Vejen, Denmark 
Exova Inc., Santa Fe Springs, CA 
Herbalife, Torrance, CA 
HVL, LLC, Pittsburgh, PA 
ISURA, Burnaby, BC, Canada     
Intertek Champaign Laboratories, Champaign, IL 
McCoy & McCoy Laboratories, Madisonville, KY 
Natural Factors, Coquitlam, BC, Canada     
Natural Remedies Private Limited, Bangalore, Karnataka, India     
Nature's Way, Green Bay, WI 
NOW Foods, Bloomingdale, IL 
NSF International, Ann Arbor, MI 
Nutra Manufacturing, Greenville, SC 
Pure Essence Labs, Las Vegas, NV 
SGS Canada Inc, Burnaby, BC, Canada     
Silliker JR Laboratories ULC (Canada), Burnaby, BC, Canada     
Standard Process Inc, Palmyra, WI 
Sustainable Labs, Inc., Ogden, UT 
Tishcon Corp, Salisbury, MD 
US Food and Drug Administration CFSAN (GA), Atlanta, GA 
US Food and Drug Administration CFSAN (MD), College Park, MD 
Underwriters Laboratories, Canton, MA 
VMI Nutrition, Salt Lake City, UT 

SRM 3279 

 

Page 7 of 7 

