NT  OF  @ 

Oy tg 

we 

< 

 
p
E
D

 
*

 
O
A

 
e

 
0
a

 
»

 
,
e
e
“

 

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material® 3281 

Cranberry (Fruit) 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended primarily for validation of methods for determining quinic acid, 
anthocyanidins, and elements in the fruit of cranberries and similar materials.  This SRM can also be used for quality 
assurance when assigning values to in-house control materials.  A unit of SRM 3281 consists of five packets, each 
containing approximately 6 g of freeze-dried, powdered fruit. 
 
The  development  of  SRM 3281  was  a  collaboration  between  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and 
Technology (NIST) and the National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements (NIH-ODS). 
 
Certified  Mass  Fraction Values:    The  certified  mass  fraction  values  of  quinic  acid  and  elements,  reported  on  a 
dry-mass basis, are provided in Tables 1 and 2.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest 
confidence in its accuracy in that all known or suspected sources of bias have been taken into account [1].  Analyses 
for value assignment were performed by NIST and collaborating laboratories.  Certified values were calculated as the 
mean  of  the  mean  values  from  NIST  methods  and  the  median  of  the  mean  values  provided  by  collaborating 
laboratories, where appropriate.  The associated uncertainties are expressed at the 95 % level of confidence [2–4]. 
 
Reference  Mass  Fraction  Values:    Reference  mass  fraction  values  for  anthocyanidins,  proximates,  and  sugars, 
reported on a dry-mass basis, are provided in Tables 3 and 4.  A NIST reference value is a noncertified value that is 
the best estimate of the true value based on available data; however, the value does not meet the NIST criteria for 
certification [1] and is provided with associated uncertainties that may reflect only measurement reproducibility, may 
not include all sources of uncertainty, or may reflect a lack of sufficient statistical agreement among multiple analytical 
methods.    The  reference  mass  fraction  values  were  derived  from  results  reported  by  NIST  and/or  collaborating 
laboratories. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 3281 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until  01 December 2027,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  instructions  given  in  this 
certificate (see “Instructions for Storage and Use”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, 
ification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is  damaged,  contaminated,
or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Overall  direction  and  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  the  certification  of  this  SRM  were 
performed by L.C. Sander, and S.A. Wise of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division; and K.E. Sharpless of the NIST 
Special Programs Office.  Revision of this certificate was coordinated by C.A. Rimmer and L.J. Wood of the NIST 
Chemical Sciences Division and W. Koshute of the Grocery Manufacturers Association (GMA, Washington, DC). 
 
Support for the development of SRM 3281 was provided in part by NIH-ODS.  Technical consultation was provided 
by J.M. Betz of the NIH-ODS.  Acquisition of the material was performed by K.E. Sharpless. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  04 April 2019 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

SRM 3281 

  

Page 1 of 7 

Analytical measurements at NIST were performed by J.F. Browning, G.E. Hahm, R. Oflaz, M.M. Phillips, B.J. Porter, 
and L.J. Wood of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Analyses for value assignment were also provided by analysts participating in three GMA Food Industry Analytical 
Chemists (GMA FIAC) share group interlaboratory comparison exercises:  Campbell Soup Company (Camden, NJ); 
Chelab  Silliker (Resana, Italy);  ConAgra  Foods  Analytical  Laboratory (Omaha, NE);  Covance,  Inc. (Battle 
Creek, MI); Covance, Inc. (Harrogate, North Yorkshire, United Kingdom); Covance Inc. (Madison, WI); Del Monte 
Foods (Walnut  Creek, CA);  Eurofins  Central  Analytical  Laboratories (New  Orleans, LA);  Eurofins  Chemical 
Control (Cuneo, Italy);  Eurofins  Scientific,  Inc. (Des  Moines, IA);  Eurofins  S&S (Hanover, MD);  General 
Mills (Golden Valley, MN); Hormel Foods Corporation (Austin, MN); Krueger Food Laboratories (Billerica, MA); 
Land O’Lakes (Arden Hills, MN); McCormick and Company (Hunt Valley, MD); National Center of Food Safety and 
Technology (Summit-Argo, IL);  NSF  International (Ann  Arbor, MI);  Ocean  Spray (Lakeville, MA);  Schwan  Food 
Company (Salina, KS);  Silliker  Canada  Co (Markham, ON, Canada);  Silliker  Food  Science  Center (Crete, IL); 
Silliker 
Iberica (Barcelona, Spain);  The  Coca-Cola  Company (Rio  de  Janeiro, Brazil);  The  Coca-Cola 
Company (Apopka, FL);  The  Coca-Cola  Company (Shanghai, China);  The  Hershey  Company  Technical 
Center (Hershey, PA); The J.M. Smucker Company (Orrville, OH); The National Food Laboratory (Livermore, CA); 
Welch’s (Billerica, MA). 
 
Statistical analysis was provided by J.H. Yen of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Office  of  Reference
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
NOTICE AND WARNING TO USERS 
 
SRM 3281 IS INTENDED FOR RESEARCH USE; NOT FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage:  The material should be stored at controlled room temperature (20 °C to 25 °C) in an unopened packet until 
needed.  For elemental analyses, the packet can be opened and resealed; test portions can be removed and analyzed 
until the material reaches its expiration date.  For other analyses, the packet can be opened and resealed; test portions 
can be removed and analyzed for two weeks after the packet was first opened. 
 
Use:  Prior to use, the contents of the packet should be mixed thoroughly.  Allow the contents to settle for one minute 
prior to opening to minimize the loss of fine particles.  Homogeneity of the material has not been evaluated for sample 
sizes smaller than those used by NIST methods described below.  Therefore, the certified and reference values may 
not be valid for test portions smaller than those described in the sections below:  0.1 g for organic acid analysis, 0.5 g 
for  elemental  analysis,  1.0 g  for  anthocyanidin  analysis.    Results  obtained  should  include  their  own  estimates  of 
uncertainty and can be compared to the certified and reference values using procedures described in reference 5.  The 
moisture conversion factor below can be used for the sample(s) when using an unopened packet for the first time.  If 
using a previously opened and resealed packet, sample(s) need to be dried using one of the recommended techniques 
(see “Determination of Moisture”). 
 
Determination of Moisture:  Moisture content of SRM 3281 was determined at NIST by (1) freeze drying to constant 
mass over 7 d; (2) drying over magnesium perchlorate in a desiccator at room temperature for 21 d; and (3) drying for 
2 h in a forced-air oven at 80 °C.  Unweighted results obtained using all three techniques were averaged to determine 
a conversion factor of (0.9761 ± 0.0067) gram dry mass per gram as-received mass, which was used to convert data 
from  an  as-received  to  a  dry-mass  basis;  the  uncertainty  shown  on  this  value  is  an  expanded  uncertainty.    An 
uncertainty component for the conversion factor (0.34 %) obtained from the moisture measurements is incorporated 
in  the  uncertainties  of  the  certified  and  reference  values,  reported  on  a  dry-mass  basis,  that  are  provided  in  this 
certificate. 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 

Material  Acquisition  and  Preparation:    Frozen  cranberries  for  production  of  SRM 3281  were  freeze-dried  and 
ground to 420 μm (40 mesh; Van Drunen Farms, Momence, IL) and shipped to NIST where they were further ground 
and sieved to 180 μm (80 mesh).  The material was shipped to High-Purity Standards (Charleston, SC), where it was 
blended, aliquoted, and heat-sealed inside nitrogen-flushed, 4 mil, polyethylene bags, which were then sealed inside 
                                                 

(1)  Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
SRM 3281 

Page 2 of 7 

nitrogen-flushed, aluminized, plastic bags, along with two packets of silica gel each.  Following packaging, SRM 3281 
was irradiated (Neutron Products, Inc., Dickerson, MD) to an absorbed dose of 7.1 kGy to 8.9 kGy. 
 
Analytical Approach for Determination of Quinic Acid:  Value assignment of the mass fraction of quinic acid in 
SRM 3281  was  based  on  the  combination  of  measurements  from  two  different  methods:    isotope  dilution  liquid 
chromatography with mass spectrometric detection (ID-LC-MS) and isotope dilution gas chromatography with mass 
spectrometric detection (ID-GC-MS). 
 
NIST Analysis for Quinic Acid Using ID-LC-MS:  The mass fraction of quinic acid was determined by ID-LC-MS 
from duplicate, nominal 0.1 g test portions taken from each of six packets of SRM 3281.  Quinic acid was extracted 
into water, and the solutions from four successive extractions were combined.  For analysis by ID-LC-MS, an organic 
acid column was held at 40 °C, and an aqueous mobile phase containing 0.5 % (volume fraction) formic acid was used 
under isocratic conditions at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min.  The mass spectrometer was operated in negative ion mode, 
with electrospray ionization.  13C3-quinic acid was used as internal standard, and quantification was based on response 
factors calculated from the relative peak areas and concentrations.  Calibrants were prepared gravimetrically at levels 
intended to approximate the levels of the quinic acid in the SRM following extraction.  The purity of the neat quinic 
acid  calibrant  material  was  determined  as  an  average  of  the  manufacturer  data  and  NIST  data,  including 
LC-absorbance  at  210 nm,  LC  with  evaporative  light  scattering  detection (ELSD),  differential  scanning 
calorimetry (DSC), and Karl Fischer titration [6]. 
 
NIST Analysis for Quinic Acid Using ID-GC-MS:  The mass fraction of quinic acid was determined by ID-GC-MS 
from duplicate, nominal 0.1 g test portions taken from each of six packets of SRM 3281.  Quinic acid was extracted 
into water, and the solutions from four successive extractions were combined.  Ten milliliter aliquots of the combined 
water extracts were dried and mixed with N-methyl-N-(trimethylsilyl)trifluoroacetamide (MSTFA) containing 1 % 
(volume fraction) trimethylchlorosilane (TMCS) for derivatization prior to analysis by GC-MS using a GC×GC-MS 
instrument.  A 5 % diphenyl/95 % dimethyl polysiloxane (mole fractions) column was used for the analysis; a second 
column,  50 %  diphenyl/50 %  dimethyl  polysiloxane (mole  fractions),  was  installed,  but  was  not  utilized  in 
two-dimensional  mode.   13C3-quinic acid was used as internal standard, and quantification was based on response 
factors calculated from the relative peak areas and concentrations.  Although full spectra were acquired, extracted ion 
chromatograms were used for quantification [6]. 
 
Analytical Approach for Determination of Elements:  Value assignment of the mass fractions of the elements in 
SRM 3281 was based on the combination of results from NIST and collaborating laboratories, where available [7].  
NIST  provided  measurements  by  using  inductively  coupled  plasma  optical  emission  spectrometry (ICP-OES), 
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), and instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA). 
 
NIST Analyses for Ca, Cu, Fe, K, Mg, Mn, Na, P, and Zn Using ICP-OES and ICP-MS:  Mass fractions of calcium, 
copper, iron, magnesium, manganese, phosphorus, potassium, sodium, and zinc were measured by ICP-OES using 
duplicate, nominal 0.5 g test portions from each of six packets of SRM 3281.  Mass fractions of copper and manganese 
were also measured by ICP-MS using duplicate, nominal 0.5 g test portions from each of six packets of SRM 3281.  
Test portions were digested in sealed vessels with nitric and hydrofluoric acids using a microwave digestion system.  
Quantification was based on the method of standard additions using calibration solutions prepared from the SRM 3100 
series of single-element standard solutions. 
 
NIST Analyses for Al, Ca, Cl, Fe, Mg, Mn, Na, and Zn Using INAA:  Mass fractions of aluminum, calcium, chlorine, 
iron, magnesium, manganese, sodium, and zinc were measured by INAA using duplicate, nominal 0.2 g test portions 
taken from each of six packets of SRM 3281.  Powders were pressed into cylindrical pellets, and samples, standards, 
and controls were packaged individually in clean polyethylene bags.  For analysis of aluminum, calcium, chlorine, 
magnesium, manganese, and sodium, the packages were irradiated with one flux monitor foil for 2 min at a reactor 
power of 20 MW.  The count was done for 5 min after a 10 min decay.  For the analysis of iron and zinc, standards 
and controls were irradiated for 6 h, with irradiation capsules inverted 180 degrees at the midpoint.  The count was 
done for 7 h to 24 h after a 2-week decay.  Quantification for INAA was based on solutions made using pure metal 
foils, pure compounds, and the SRM 3100 series of single element standard solutions. 
 
Analytical  Approach  for  Determination  of  Anthocyanidins:    Value  assignment  of  the  mass  fractions  of 
of  the  mass  fractions  of
anthocyanidins  in  SRM 3281  was  based  on  measurements  at  NIST  using  liquid  chromatography  with  absorbance 
detection (LC-absorbance).  Mass fractions of cyanidin, delphinidin, and peonidin were measured by LC-absorbance 
using duplicate, nominal 1.0 g test portions from each of six packets of SRM 3281.  Anthocyanidins were isolated 
from SRM 3281 and hydrolyzed by using a 24h -Soxhlet extraction into 250 mL of 6 % (volume fraction) hydrochloric 
acid in methanol.  Pelargonidin chloride was used as an internal standard.  Following extraction, 50 mL of the extract 
was reduced to approximately 10 mL and analyzed by LC-absorbance using a C18 column and detection at 520 nm.  
Gradient elution was used with a 25 mmol/L potassium phosphate/methanol mobile phase and a flow rate of 1 mL/min.  
Calibrants were prepared gravimetrically at levels intended to approximate the levels of the anthocyanidins in the 

at 

SRM 3281 

Page 3 of 7 

SRM following extraction.  The purity of the neat calibrant materials was determined at NIST using LC-absorbance 
at 520 nm. 
 
Collaborating Laboratories’ Analyses:  The GMA FIACC Share Group laboratories were asked to use their usual 
methods to make single measurements on test portions taken from each of two packets of SRM 3281 for measurements 
of  elements  and  sugars.    Because  of  the  variability  among  data  provided  by  laboratories  participating  in  an 
interlaboratory comparison exercise, the median of the means was used.  The median of the collaborating laboratories’ 
means was combined with NIST data for calculation of certified values of elements.  Collaborating laboratories’ data 
alone were used to assign reference values for proximates, and sugars.  Commercial laboratories were used to provide 
measurement values for proximates. 
 
Homogeneity  Assessment:    The  homogeneity  of  quinic  acid,  anthocyanidins,  and  elements  in  SRM 3281  was 
assessed at NIST by using the methods and test portion sizes described above.  An analysis of variance with 5 % 
significance level did not show inhomogeneity for the test portions analyzed (see “Instructions for Storage and Use”).  
Homogeneity of constituents measured solely by collaborating laboratories (e.g., proximates, sugars) was not assessed, 
although the data were treated as though these analytes were homogeneously distributed. 
 
Value Assignment:  For calculation of assigned values for analytes that were measured only by NIST, the mean of 
the mean values from NIST results was used.  The collaborating laboratories reported the individual results for each 
of their analyses for a given analyte.  The mean of each laboratory’s results was then determined.  For calculation of 
assigned values for analytes that were measured only by the collaborating laboratories, the median of the laboratory 
means was used.  For analytes that were also measured by NIST, the mean of the individual sets of NIST data was 
averaged  with  the  median  of  the  individual  collaborating  laboratory  means.    For  calculation  of  assigned  values 
determined by commercial laboratories, the mean of the method means of each laboratory was used. 
 
Certified Mass Fraction Value for Quinic Acid:  The certified mass fraction value, reported on a dry-mass basis, is 
the combined mean from the  mean of NIST ID-LC-MS data and the mean of NIST ID-GC-MS data.  Values are 
expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the certified value and U95%(x) is the expanded uncertainty of the certified value.  
The true value of the analyte is believed to lie within the interval x ± U95%(x) with 95 % confidence.  To propagate 
this uncertainty, treat the certified value as a normally distributed random variable with mean x and standard deviation 
U95%(x)/2 [2–4].  The measurand is the total mass fraction of quinic acid in cranberry (fruit) as listed in Table 1 on a 
dry-mass  basis. 
  Metrological  traceability  is  to  the  SI  derived  unit  for  mass  fraction  (expressed  as 
milligrams per gram). 
 

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fraction Value for Quinic Acid in SRM 3281 

 

 

 

Quinic Acid 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/g) 

 

47.8  ±  6.8 

SRM 3281 

Page 4 of 7 

Certified Mass Fraction Values for Elements:  Each certified mass fraction value, reported on a dry-mass basis, is 
the  combined  mean  from  the  means  of  NIST  data  and  the  median  of  the  mean  results  provided  by  collaborating 
laboratories.    Values  are  expressed  as  x ± U95%(x),  where  x  is  the  certified  value  and  U95%(x)  is  the  expanded 
uncertainty of the certified value.  The true value of the analyte is believed to lie within the interval x ± U95%(x) with 
95 % confidence.  To propagate this uncertainty, treat the certified value as a normally distributed random variable 
with mean x and standard deviation U95%(x)/2 [2–4].  The measurand is the total mass fraction for each element listed 
in Table 2 on a dry-mass basis.  Metrological traceability is to the SI derived unit for mass fraction (expressed as 
milligrams per kilogram). 

 
1
Table 2. Certified Mass Fraction Values for Elements in SRM 3281 

ts  in  SRM 

 

 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

514 

±  18 

3.65 ± 

0.15 

26.3  ± 

1.5 

429 

±  20 

21.59 ± 

0.44 

807 

±  56 

  7680 

±  400 

263 

±  10 

6.69 ± 

0.51 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Calcium (Ca)(a,b,c) 
Copper (Cu)(a,b,c,d) 
Iron (Fe)(a,b,c) 
Magnesium (Mg)(a,b,c) 
Manganese (Mn)(a,b,c,d) 
Phosphorus (P)(a,e) 
Potassium (K)(a,b,c) 
Sodium (Na)(a,b,c) 
Zinc (Zn)(a,b,c) 

 
 

 
(a) NIST ICP-OES 
(b) NIST INAA 
(c) Collaborating Laboratories.  Reported methods included atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS), ICP-MS, and ICP-OES. 
(d) NIST ICP-MS 
(e) Collaborating Laboratories.  Reported methods included ICP-MS, colorimetry, and ICP-OES. 
 

SRM 3281 

Page 5 of 7 

Reference  Mass  Fraction  Values  for  Proximates,  Sugars,  and  Calories:    Each  reference  mass  fraction  value, 
reported on a dry-mass basis, is the median of the mean values provided by collaborating laboratories or the mean of 
the means provided by commercial laboratories.  Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the estimated value 
and U95%(x) is the expanded uncertainty of the value.  The method-specific value of the analyte is believed to lie within 
the interval x ± U95%(x) with about a 95 % confidence [2-4].  For proximates and sugars, the measurands are the mass 
fractions listed in Table 3, on a dry-mass basis, as determined by the methods indicated.  Metrological traceability is 
to mass fraction (expressed as grams per 100 grams) as realized by the methods used.  For calories, the measurand is 
the caloric content (expressed as kilocalories per 100 grams), listed in Table 3 on a dry-mass basis as determined by 
the method indicated and metrological traceability is to the derived unit for energy. 
 

Table 3.  Reference Mass Fraction Values for Proximates, Sugars, and Calories in SRM 3281 

Solids(a) 
Ash(b) 
Protein(c) 
Carbohydrate(d) 
Total Sugars(e) 
Fructose(e) 
Glucose(e) 
 

 

Calories(d) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Mass Fraction 
(g/100 g) 

90.9  ±  1.2 

4.89  ±  0.18 

2.10  ±  0.51 

81.6  ±  3.5 

24.4  ±  3.6 

4.27  ±  0.48 

20.1  ±  3.2 

 
Energy 
(kcal/100 g) 

  376 

±  28 

 
(a) AOAC 925.09 Solids (Total) and Moisture in Flour 
(b) AOAC 923.03 Ash of Flour 
(c) AOAC 922.15 Crude Protein in Meat and Meat Products Including Pet Foods. 
(d) Calculation 
(e) Collaborating Laboratories.  Reported methods included LC with refractive index and LC with evaporative light scattering 

with

detection. 

 
 
Reference Mass Fraction Values for Elements:  Each reference mass fraction value is the mean result of NIST 
analyses using INAA.  Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the estimated value and U95%(x) is the expanded 
uncertainty of the value.  The method-specific value of the analyte is believed to lie within the interval x ± U95%(x) 
with  about  a  95 %  confidence [2-4].    The  measurand  is  the  mass  fraction  for  each  element  listed  in  Table 4  on  a 
dry-mass basis as determined by the method indicated.  Metrological traceability is to the SI derived unit for mass 
fraction (expressed as milligrams per kilogram), as realized by the method used. 
 

Table 4.  Reference Mass Fraction Values for Elements in SRM 3281 

Aluminum (Al) 
Chlorine (Cl) 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

 

 

14.14 ±  0.66 

796.4  ±  9.4 

 

 

 

 

 
 

SRM 3281 

Page 6 of 7 

Reference Mass Fraction Values for Anthocyanidins:  Each reference mass fraction value is the mean result of 
NIST analyses using LC-absorbance.  Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the estimated value and U95%(x) 
is the expanded uncertainty of the value.  The method-specific value of the analyte is believed to lie within the interval 
x ± U95%(x) with about a 95 % confidence [2-4].  The measurand is the mass fraction for each analyte listed in Table 5, 
on a dry-mass basis, as determined by the method indicated.  Metrological traceability is to mass fraction (expressed 
as milligrams per kilogram) as realized by the methods used. 
  

Table 5.  Reference Mass Fraction Values for Anthocyanidins in SRM 3281 
 

 

Cyanidin 
Delphinidin 

Peonidin 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

 

 

 

119 

±  31 

5.18 ±  0.68 

121 

±  22 

 
 
 

REFERENCES 

 

[2] 

 
[1]  May, W.E.;  Parris, R.M.;  Beck II, C.M.;  Fassett, J.D.;  Greenberg, R.R.;  Guenther, F.R.;  Kramer, G.W.; 
Wise, S.A.; Gills, T.E.; Colbert, J.C.; Gettings, R.J.; MacDonald, B.R.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at 
NIST for Value-Assignment of Reference Materials for Chemical Measurements; NIST Special Publication 260-
136  (2000);  available  at  https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/srm/SP260-136.PDF  (accessed 
Apr 2019). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections); Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (JCGM) (2008); available at 
https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Apr 2019);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
https://www.nist.gov/pml/nist-technical-note-1297 (accessed Apr 2019). 
JCGM 101:2008; Evaluation of measurement data – Supplement 1 to the “Guide to Expression of Uncertainty 
in  Measurement”  -  Propagation  of  distributions  using  a  Monte  Carlo  method;  JCGM  (2008);  available  at 
https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_101_2008_E.pdf (accessed Apr 2019). 
[4]  Efron, B.; Tibshirani, R.J.; An Introduction to the Bootstrap; Chapman & Hall, London, UK (1993). 
[5]  Sharpless, K.E.; Duewer, D.L.; Standard Reference Materials for Analysis of Dietary Supplements; J. AOAC 

[3] 

Int., Vol. 91, pp. 1298–1302 (2008). 

[6]  Phillips, M.M.; Case, R.J.; Rimmer, C.A.; Sharpless, K.E.; Wise, S.A.; Sander, L.C.; Determination of Organic 
Acids in Vaccinium Berry Standard Reference Materials; Anal. Bioanal. Chem., Vol. 398, pp. 425–434 (2010). 
[7]  Wood, L.J.;  Sharpless, K.E.;  Pichon, M.;  Porter, B.J.;  Yen, J.H.;  Ehling, S.;  Characterization  of  Three  Berry 

Standard Reference Materials for Nutrients; J. Agric. Food Chem., Vol. 59, pp. 7246–7252 (2011). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certificate Revision History: 04 April 2019 (Removal of reference values for antioxidant capacity since methods used for analyses provided in 
previous certificates are no longer considered valid; correction to chlorine reference value; editorial changes); 28 August 2017 (Change of element 
reference  values  to  certified  values;  addition  of  reference  values  for  proximates,  aluminum,  chlorine,  and  anthocyanidins;  removal  of  certified 
values for citric acid, malic acid, and shikimic acid; change of expiration date; editorial changes); 29 February 2012 (Addition of reference values 
for antioxidant capacity; editorial changes); 14 September 2010 (Original certificate date). 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
(301) 948-3730; 
telephone 
accomplished  by  contacting 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

fax 

 

SRM 3281 

Page 7 of 7 

