 

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material 3299 
 
Ground Turmeric (Curcuma longa L.) Rhizome 

dUse 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  validating  analytical  methods  for  the 
determination of curcuminoids and elements in ground turmeric (Curcuma longa L.) rhizomes and similar matrices.  
SRM 3299  can  also  be  used  for  quality  assurance  when assigning  values  to  in-house  control materials.  A unit  of 
SRM 3299 consists of five pouches, each containing approximately 3 g of turmeric rhizome. 
 
The  development  of  SRM 3299  was  a  collaboration  among 
the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and 
Technology (NIST), the National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements (NIH-ODS), and the Food and 
Drug Administration Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (FDA CDER). 
 
Certified  Mass  Fraction  Values:    Certified  mass  fraction  values  of  curcuminoids  and  elements  in  SRM 3299, 
reported on a dry-mass basis, are provided in Tables 1 and 2.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has 
the highest confidence in its accuracy in that all known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken 
into account [1].  Analyses for value assignment were performed by NIST and collaborating laboratories.  Certified 
values were calculated as the unweighted means of the mean values from NIST methods and the weighted median of 
the collaborating laboratories means, where appropriate.  The associated uncertainties are expressed at an approximately 
95 % level of confidence [2–4]. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 3299 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until  30 June 2029,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this 
certificate (see “Instructions for Storage and Use”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, 
1,  contaminated, 
or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination of the technical measurements leading to the certification of this SRM was performed by C.A. Rimmer 
and L.J. Wood of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Support  for  the  development  of  SRM 3299  was  provided  in  part  by NIH-ODS  and FDA CDER.    Technical 
consultation was provided by J.M. Betz (NIH-ODS) and A. Nguyen Pho (FDA CDER).  Acquisition of the material 
was coordinated by A. Nguyen Pho of FDA CDER and K.E. Sharpless of the NIST Special Programs Office. 
 
Analytical measurements at NIST were performed by M.R. Ale, C.A. Barber, R. Oflaz, H. Simon, and L.J. Wood 
of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Statistical analysis was provided by J.H. Yen of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
27
Certificate Issue Date: 27 September 2019 
 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

99 

 

Page 1 of 5 

  

  

SRM 3299 

Analysts  at  the  following  laboratories  performed  measurements  that  contributed  to  the  value  assignment  of 
curcuminoids  and  elements in  SRM  3299  as  part  of  an  interlaboratory  comparison  exercise  coordinated  by  NIST:  
Advanced  Botanical  Consulting  &  Testing,  Inc.  (Tustin, CA); Alkemists  Laboratories  (Costa  Mesa, CA); Arizona 
Nutritional  Supplements  (Chandler, AZ); Atlas  Bioscience  Labs  (Tucson, AZ);  BI  Nutraceuticals  (McCarran, CA); 
Brighton Laboratory (Henderson, NV); British Columbia Institute of Technology (Burnaby, BC, Canada); Canadian 
Food Inspection Agency (Longueuil, Canada); Craft Technologies, Inc (Wilson, NC); Eurofins Supplement Analysis 
Center (Petaluma, CA); ISURA (Burnaby, Canada); Nard Naturex SA France (Avignon, France); Natural Remedies 
Private Limited (Bangalore, India); NOW Foods (Bloomingdale, IL); Oregon’s Wild Harvest (Redmond, OR); Shree 
 Canada);  SORA  Labs 
Dhootapapeshwar  Ltd  (Mumbai, India);  Silliker  JR  Laboratories  ULC  (Burnaby, 
(Forsyth, MO); Tishcon Corp (Salisbury, MD). 
 
Office  of  Reference 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
NOTICE AND WARNING TO USERS: SRM 3299 IS INTENDED FOR RESEARCH USE; NOT FOR HUMAN 
CONSUMPTION. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage:  The SRM should be stored at controlled room temperature (20 °C to 25 °C) in the original unopened packet 
until required for use.  For elemental analyses, the packet can be opened, resealed, and stored at room temperature; test 
portions can be removed and analyzed until the material reaches its expiration date.  The stability of curcuminoids in 
previously opened packets has not been investigated, and therefore the certification only applies to the initial use and 
the same results are not guaranteed if the remaining powder is used at a later date. 
 
Use:  Before use, the contents of a packet of material should be mixed thoroughly.  To relate analytical determinations 
to the certified values in this Certificate of Analysis, the following masses used for NIST analyses should be used as 
the minimum sample size to ensure valid results: 0.5 g for elements (see “Source and Preparation” below), and 0.1 g 
for  curcuminoids.    Test  portions  should  be  analyzed  as  received  and  results  converted  to  a  dry-mass  basis.    The 
moisture conversion factor given below (see “Determination of Moisture”) can be used for the sample(s) when using 
an unopened packet for the first time.  If using a previously opened and resealed packet, moisture must be determined 
using one of the recommended techniques described below.  Analytical results should include their own estimates of 
uncertainty and can be compared to the certified values using procedures described in reference 5. 
 
Determination of Moisture:  Moisture content of SRM 3299 was determined at NIST by (1) freeze-drying to constant 
mstant 
mass over 7 days; (2) drying over magnesium perchlorate in a desiccator at room temperature for 28 d; and (3) drying 
for 2 h in a forced-air oven at 80 °C.  The means from all three techniques were averaged to determine a dry-mass 
proportion of (0.9146 ± 0.0060) gram dry-mass per gram as-received mass; the uncertainty shown on this value is an 
expanded uncertainty to represent a 95 % level of confidence.  The conversion factor used to convert data from an 
as-received to a dry-mass basis is the inverse of the dry-mass proportion, i.e. as-received data were divided by 0.9146 
to determine dry-mass results.  A relative uncertainty component of 0.3 % for the conversion factor obtained from the 
moisture measurements is incorporated in the uncertainties of the certified values, reported on a dry-mass basis, that 
are provided in this certificate. 
 
SOURCE, PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
Source and Preparation:  The material for production of SRM 3299 is a turmeric rhizome powder.  The material 
was received as nominally 180 μm (80 mesh) particle size and was packaged without additional grinding.  The extract 
was  transferred  to  High-Purity Standards  (Charleston, SC) where  it  was  blended, aliquoted, and heat-sealed  inside 
nitrogen-flushed  4 mil  polyethylene  bags,  which  were  then  sealed  inside  nitrogen-flushed  aluminized  plastic  bags 
along with two packets of silica gel each.  Following packaging, SRM 3299 was irradiated (Neutron Products, Inc., 
Dickerson, MD) to an absorbed dose of 8.4 kGy to 10.7 kGy. 
 
Value  assignment  of  the  mass  fractions  of
Analytical  Approach  for  Determination  of  Curcuminoids:    Value  assignment  of  the  mass  fractions  of 
bisdemethoxycurcumin,  desmethoxycurcumin,  and  curcumin  in  SRM 3299  was  based  on  the  combination  of 
measurements  provided  by  NIST  using liquid  chromatography  with absorbance  detection (LC-absorbance)  and  by 

oids: 

                                                

(1)Certain  commercial  instruments,  materials,  or  processes  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, nor does it imply that the instruments, materials, or processes identified are necessarily the best available for the 
purpose. 
SRM 3299 

Page 2 of 5 

LC 

by 

provided 

laboratories 

fluorescence 
fluorescence 

collaborating 

with 
and  LC  with 

using  LC-absorbance 

data 
detection (LC-fluorescence). 
 
of  bisdemethoxycurcumin,
NIST  Analyses  for  Curcuminoids  using  LC-Absorbance:    The  mass  fractions  of  bisdemethoxycurcumin, 
desmethoxycurcumin, and curcumin were measured by LC-absorbance in duplicate 100 mg test portions taken from 
each of ten packets of SRM 3299.  Phenol was added to each test portions as an internal standard and curcuminoids 
were  extracted  in  methanol  by  end-over-end  rotation  for  15 min  followed  by  ultrasonication  for  15 min.    After 
centrifugation  for  10  min  at  3000  rpm,  curcuminoids  in  the  sample  extracts  were  separated  using  a  mixed-mode 
C18-phenyl  column  and  monitored  by  absorbance  at  425  nm.    The  phenol  internal  standard  was  monitored  by 
absorbance at 270 nm.  Calibrants were prepared gravimetrically at levels intended to approximate the levels of the 
curcuminoids in the SRM following extraction.  The purity of the neat calibrant materials was determined at NIST 
using LC-absorbance at 210 nm, 254 nm, and 425 nm.  A single internal standard solution was used for the calibrants 
and samples. 
 
Analytical  Approach  for  Determination  of  Elements:    Value  assignment  of  the  mass  fractions  of  elements  in 
SRM 3299  was  based  on  the  combination  of  results  from  NIST  and  collaborating  laboratories.    NIST  provided 
measurements by using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). 
 
NIST Analysis for As, Cd, and Pb Using ICP-MS:  Mass fractions of arsenic, cadmium, and lead were determined by 
ICP-MS from duplicate, nominal 0.5 g test portions taken from each of six packets of the SRM.  Test portions were 
digested in sealed vessels with a HNO3/HF mixture using a microwave digestion system.  Quantitation was based on 
the method of standard additions using calibration solutions prepared from the SRM 3100 series of single-element 
standard solutions. 
 
Collaborating  Laboratories’  Analyses:   The  collaborating  laboratories  were  asked  to  use  their  usual  methods  to 
make single measurements on test portions taken from each of three packets of SRM 3299.  Because of the variability 
among data provided by laboratories participating in an interlaboratory comparison exercise, the weighted median of 
the individual laboratory means is used, and the uncertainty is estimated using a bootstrap procedure, both based on a 
Laplace random effects model [6,7]. 
 
Homogeneity Assessment:  The homogeneity of curcuminoids and elements was assessed at NIST using the methods 
and test portion sizes described above; analysis of variance with 5 % significance showed possible inhomogeneity for 
bisdemethoxycurcumin.    The  uncertainty  for  bisdemethoxycurcumin  incorporates  a  component  for  possible 
inhomogeneity based on the standard deviation. 
 
 

 

SRM 3299 

Page 3 of 5 

Certified Mass  Fraction  Values  for  Curcuminoids:    Each  certified  mass  fraction  value, reported  on  a  dry-mass 
basis, is the combined mean from each set of analyses by NIST and the median of the means of results provided by 
collaborating  laboratories.    Values  are  expressed  as  x ± U95%(x),  where  x  is  the  certified  value  and  U95%(x)  is  the 
expanded  uncertainty  of  the  certified  value.    The  true  value  of  the  analyte  is  believed  to  lie  within  the  interval 
x ± U95%(x) with 95 % confidence.  To propagate this uncertainty, the certified value should be treated as a normally 
distributed random variable with mean x and standard deviation U95%(x)/2 [2–4].  The measurand is the total mass 
fraction for each curcuminoid listed in Table 1 on a dry-mass basis.  Metrological traceability is to the SI-derived unit 
for mass fraction (expressed as milligrams per gram). 
 

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fraction Values for Curcuminoids in SRM 3299 
 

cuminoids 

 

Bisdemethoxycurcumin (a,b,c) 

Desmethoxycurcumin (a,b,c) 

Curcumin (a,c) 

 
 

Mass Fraction  
(mg/g) 

3.66  ± 

0.23 

3.79  ± 

0.37 

12.17  ± 

0.56 

 

 

 

 

(a) NIST LC-absorbance 
(b) Collaborating Laboratories LC-fluorescence 
(c) Collaborating Laboratories LC-absorbance 
 
 
 
Certified Mass Fraction Values for Elements:  Each certified mass fraction value, reported on a dry-mass basis, is 
the combined mean from each set of analyses by NIST using ICP-MS and the median of the means of results provided 
by collaborating laboratories using ICP-MS.  Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the certified value and 
U95%(x) is the expanded uncertainty of the certified value.  The true value of the analyte is believed to lie within the 
interval x ± U95%(x) with 95 % confidence.  To propagate this uncertainty, the certified value should be treated as a 
normally distributed random variable with mean x and standard deviation U95%(x)/2 [2–4].  The measurand is the total 
mass fraction for each element listed in Table 2 on a dry-mass basis.  Metrological traceability is to the SI-derived 
unit for mass fraction (expressed as milligrams per kilogram). 
  

Table 2.  Certified Mass Fraction Values for Elements in SRM 3299 
 

t  Elements

 

Arsenic (As) 

Cadmium (Cd) 

Lead (Pb) 

Mass Fraction  
(mg/kg) 

0.332 

±  0.042 

1.73 

1.20 

±  0.24 

±  0.11 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

SRM 3299 

Page 4 of 5 

REFERENCES 
 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value Assignment- of 
Reference Materials for Chemical Measurements; NIST Special Publication 260-136; U.S. Government Printing 
Office:  Washington, DC  (2000);  available  at  https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/srm/SP260-
136.PDF (accessed Sep 2019). 

[2]  JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(GUM  1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology  (2008);  available  at 
https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Sep 2019);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
https://www.nist.gov/pml/nist-technical-note-1297 (accessed Sep 2019). 

[3]  JCGM 101:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data – Supplement 1 to the Guide to Expression of Uncertainty in 
Measurement  -  Propagation  of  Distributions  Using  a  Monte  Carlo  Method;  JCGM (2008); available at 
https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_101_2008_E.pdf (accessed Sep 2019). 
[4]  Efron, B.; Tibshirani, R.J.; An Introduction to the Bootstrap; Chapman & Hall, London, UK (1993). 
[5]  Sharpless, K.E.; Duewer, D.L.; Standard Reference Materials for Analysis of Dietary Supplements; J. AOAC Int., 

Vol. 91, pp. 1298–1302 (2008). 

[6]  Searle, S.; Casella, G.; McCulloch, C.; Variance Components; John Wiley, Hoboken, NJ (1992). 
[7]  Rukhin, A.L.; Possolo, A.; Laplace Random Effects Models for Interlaboratory Studies; Computational Statistics 

and Data Analysis, Vol. 55, pp. 1815–1827 (2011). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by 
(301) 948-3730;  
e-mail: srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

contacting 

telephone 

fax 

SRM 3299 

Page 5 of 5 

