 

LEN 
eS / 

‘Staves  OF

 

 

National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Report of Investigation 
 
Reference Material 8438 
 
Soft Winter Wheat Flour  
 
Agriculture Canada 

best estimates of the true values; 

 are noncertified values that are the 

ll sources of uncertainty, or may reflect a lack of 

ts in flour and other similar food, agricultural, and 

 derived from results reported in an interlaboratory 

Distributed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology 

 
 
 
This Reference Material (RM) is intended for use in evaluating analytical methods and instruments used for the 
determination of major, minor, and trace constituent elemen
biological materials.  This material can  also be used for quality assurance wh en assigning values to in-house control 
materials.  RM 8438 consists of 50 g of flour packaged in two glass bottles containing 25 g each. 
 
Reference Concentration Values: Reference concentration values for major, minor, and trace constituent elements 
are provided in Table 1.  These reference values were
comparison exercise.  Reference values
however, the values do not meet NIST criteria for certifica tion and are provided with associated uncertainties that 
may reflect only measurement precision, may not include a
sufficient statistical agreement among multiple analytical methods.  
 
Information Concentration Values:   Information concentration values for additional elements are provided in 
Table 2.  These are noncertified values with no reported un certainties as there is insufficient information to assess 
uncertainties.  The information values are given to provide additional characterization of the material.  Use of t his RM 
 to quantitatively monitor method performan ce for analytes other than those with  reference concentration values in 
Table 1 is not warranted. 
 
Expiration of Report:   The Report of Investigation of RM 8438 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty 
specified, until  31 August 2011 , provided the RM is handled in accordance  with instructions given in this report 
(see “Instructions for Use”).  This report is nullified if the RM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of RM Value Assignment:   NIST will monitor this RM over the period of its value assignment.  If 
substantive technical changes occur that affect the value assignment before the expiration of this report, NIST will 
notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
The material was prepared at Agriculture Canada under th
Resources Research (CLBRR), who also coordinated the in
material.  Statistical support was provided by M.S. Wolynetz, Statistical Research Section, Research Program Service, 
Agriculture Canada.   
 
Support aspects involved in the issuance of this RM were coordinated through the NIST Measurement Services 
Division. 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD  20899 
Report Issue Date:  22 February 2008 
See Report Revision History on Page 5 

e direction of M. Ihnat, Centre for Land and Biological 
terlaboratory analytical campaign to characterize the 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

Stephen A. Wise, Chief 
Analytical Chemistry Division 

 

RM 8438 

Page 1 to 6 

le and should be 

0.5 g should be taken for analysis.  Moisture content 
ion of analytical results to a dry-mass basis.  The 

NOTICE AND WARNING TO USERS 
 
Storage:   Until required for use, RM 8438 should be  stored at room temperature in  its original bottle, tightly capped, 
and NOT exposed to intense direct light or ultraviolet radiation. 
 
Warning:  For laboratory use only.  NOT for human consumption. 
 
Instructions for Use:   Prior to each use, contents of the bottle shoul d be well mixed by gentle  shaking and rolling of 
the container.  A recommended minimum subsample mass of 
should be determined on a separate subsample for convers
recommended method of drying to relate analytical results to the reference values listed in Table 1 is drying for 
4 hours in an air oven at 85 °C.  Values reported in Tables  1 and 2 represent total concentrations of elements in 
this RM. Dissolution procedures should be capable of rendering a completely dissolved samp
designed to avoid losses of elements by volatilization or by retention on decomposition and processin g containers and 
measuring equipment. Analytical methods should be capable of measuring total levels of analytes for comparison with 
reference values. 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS1 
 
Preparation:  The material used for preparation of RM 8438 
obtained from Maple Leaf Mills, Almonte, Ontario, Canada.  All preparatory work following acquisition of the 
commercial product was performed at the facilities of Agri
sterilized with 60Co gamma radiation to 2.0 megarads by Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.  All subsequent processing was 
performed using plastic equipment.  The material was sieved through nylon monofilament sieve cloths supported in 
high density white polyethylene holders.  Pairs of sieves w ith openings of approximately 150 µm and 50 µm were used 
to yield suitable narrow middle cuts constituting the RM.  This fraction was blended in a polymethylmethacrylate 
V-configuration blender and packaged into clean 70 mL brim capacity, colorless glass bottles with triseal 
(polyethylene)-lined black polypropylene screw caps.   
 
Assessment of Homogeneity:   Homogeneity testing was performed on duplicate samples taken from four randomly 
selected units by one laboratory.  No statistically si
potassium, magnesium, manganese, sodium, or zinc in 2 g sample
though they are homogeneous, although the homogeneity of other analytes has not been investigated.   
 
Value Assignment:   Reference concentrations of elements were 
assessment described above and an interlaboratory compar ison exercise involving laboratories shown in Appendix A 
[4].  Analytical methods are provided in Table 3.  In the interlaboratory comparison exercise, analyses were performed 
by each participant on duplicate subsamples  from randomly selected (usually fou r) units of material using subsample 
masses and methods left to the discretion of the analyst.   Subsample sizes ranged from 0.001 g to 5 g, typically 1 g.  
Elemental determinations were performed  on “as received” material, with conversion of results to a dry-mass basis 
using moisture values determined on separate 2 g subsamples dried by the procedure specified in this report.  Reference 
values provided in Table 1 are based on re sults generally obtained by at least tw o, but typically several, independent 
analytical methods.   Concentration es timates for additional elements are provi ded in Table 2 as information values 
only, as they are based on results of limited determinations or only one analytical method, or may lack sufficient 
statistical agreement among multiple analytical methods. 

gnificant heterogeneity was found for calcium, copper, iron, 

culture Canada, Ottawa [1].  The dry bulk powder was 

was unbleached, enriched so ft winter wheat flour 

s [2,3].  Data for all anal ytes have been treated as 

determined using results from the homogeneity 

                     

1Certain commercial materials and equipment ar

e identified in order to ad

equately specify the experi mental procedure.  Such 

identification does not imply a recommendation  or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the 
materials or equipment are the best available for the purpose. 

  

 

RM 8438 

Page 2 to 6 

 

Table 1.  Reference Concentrations of Constituent Elements 

 

 

(%)(a) 

Fraction 

Methods 

±  0.029 
±  0.006 
±  0.021 
±  0.019 

 
 Mass 
 Element 
 
 Nitrogen  1.756 
 Phosphorus 0.108 
 Potassium 0.148 
 Sulfur 
0.126 
 
 Mass 
 Element 
 
 Calcium 240 
 Chlorine 640 
 Magnesium 214 
 Manganese 5.4 
 Selenium  0.076 
 
(a)  Reference values, expressed as mass fractions on a dry- mass basis, are equally weighted means of results from 

A01, B02, D01  
D01, F02, K03  
A01, B02, D01 
A01, A03, B02, D01  
C01, C04, G01 

I01, J01, J02 
B02, F01, F02  
A01, A03, D01  
B02, J02, J04, M02 

±  23 
±  60 
±  16 
±  0.6 
±  0.009 

Fraction 
(a) 

Methods 

(mg/kg)

(mg/kg)
 

Fraction 
(a)  

Table 2.  Information Concentrations of Constituent Elements 

generally at least two, but typically several, different analytical methods applied by analysts in different laboratories. 
The exception to the approach involving at least two independently different analytical methods for establishing 
reference values for this RM is the acceptance of data for zinc by essentia
lly a single reliable atomic absorption 
method applied in two laboratories with suitable quality c ontrol.  Uncertainties are imprecision estimates expressed 
either as a 95 % confidence interval, based on a sample mass of at least 0.5 g.  These uncertainties, based on 
between-method, between-laboratory, between-unit, and within-unit estimates of variances, include measures of 
analytical method and laboratory impr ecisions and biases and material i nhomogeneity.  (NIST has replaced the 
previously used term “best estimate” with “reference value.”) 
(b)    Analytical method codes and descriptions are provided in Table 3. 
 
 
 
 Mass 
 Element 
 
 Aluminum 2.3 
 Barium 
 Boron 
 Cadmium 
 
 
 Fluorine 
 
 Mercury 
 
 Sodium 
 Vanadium 
 
 
(a) These analytical values, on a dry-mass basis, are estimates  given strictly for information as they are based on results 
of limited determinations or only one method, or may lack  sufficient statistical agreement among multiple analytical 
methods; no uncertainties are provided.  Use of this RM  to quantitatively monitor met hod performance for elements 
other than those with reference concentration values in Table 1 is NOT warranted. 

1 
0.1 
0.03 
0.032  
1.2 
0.04 
29 
0.002 
0.29 

  B02, C06, F01 
A01, D01 
D01 

Chromium 
Copper 

 
Methods  

  A01, A03, B02  

  A01, C06, D01 

B02 
B02 
A06 

  A01, A03    

Molybdenum 

0.03 
5.8 

A06, C05 

B02, D01 

 
   

B02, 

Zinc 

A09 

H04 

Iron 

 
 
 
 

   

7 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(b) Analytical method codes and descriptions are provided in Table 3. 

 

RM 8438 

Page 3 to 6 

 
 
 
 
Analytical Method 
 
Acid digestion flame atomic 
absorption spectrometry 
 
Dry ashing flame atomic 
absorption spectrometry 
 
Dry ashing electrothermal 
atomic absorption spectrometry 
 
Acid digestion cold vapor 
atomic absorption spectrometry 
 
Acid digestion inductively 
coupled plasma atomic emission 
spectrometry 
 
Acid digestion isotope dilution 
mass spectrometry 
 
Acid digestion dry ashing 
hydride generation isotope 
dilution inductively coupled 
plasma mass spectrometry 
 
Dry ashing acid digestion isotope 
dilution mass spectrometry 
 
Acid digestion isotope dilution 
inductively coupled plasma mass 
spectrometry 
 
Instrumental neutron activation 
analysis  
 
Acid digestion light absorption 
spectrometry 
 
Dry ashing light absorption 
spectrometry 
 
Acid digestion fluorometry 
 
Extraction ion selective 
electrode 
 
Kjeldahl method for nitrogen 
-volumetry 
 
Combustion elemental analysis 
-thermal conductivity 

 

RM 8438 

Code 

A01 

A03 

A06 

A09 

B02 
 

C01 

C04 

C05 

C06 

D01 

F01 

F02 

G01 

H04 

I01 

J01 

Table 3. Analytical Methods Used to Determine Reference  
and Information Concentration Values(a)  

Elements Determined  

Ca, (Cu), (Fe), K, Mg, Mn, (Na), (Zn)  

(Fe), K, Mn, (Zn)  

(Cd), (Cr ) 

(Hg)   

(Al), (B), (Ba), Ca, (Cu), (Fe), Mg   
Mn, (Mo), P, S, (V) 

(Al), Ca, Cl, (Cu), K, Mg, Mn, (Na), (V) 
 

Se  

Se  

(Cr) 

(Cu), (Mo) 

(Mo), P  

Cl, P   

Se  

(F)  

N 

N 

Page 4 to 6 

J02 

Combustion elemental analysis 
with chromatographic separation 
-thermal conductivity 
 
Combustion elemental analysis 
-fluorometry 
 
Combustion volumetry 
 
Dry ashing gravimetry 
 
(a) Letter codes refer to classes of similar methods; number c

M02 

K03 

J04 

have only informational values in this RM. 

N  

S 

Cl 

S 

 
 
 
 REFERENCES 
 
[1] Ihnat M.; 

odes refer to specific variants.  Elements in parentheses 

Preparation of Twelve Candidate Agricultural Reference Materials

; Fresenius’ J. Anal. Chem., 

Vol. 332, pp. 539–545 (1988). 

[2] Ihnat, M.; 

High Reliability Atomic Absorption Spectrometry 

of Major and Minor Elements in Biological 

Materials; Fresenius Z. Anal. Chem. Vol. 326, pp. 739–741 (1987). 

[3] Ihnat, M.; 

Reliable Measurement of Major, Minor, and Trace Elemental Nutrients

; J. Res. Nat. Bur. Stds. 

Vol. 93, pp. 354–358 (1988). 

[4]  Ihnat, M.; Stoeppler, M.; 

Preliminary Assessment of Homogeneity of New Candidate Agricultural/Food 

Reference Materials; Fresenius’ J. Anal. Chem., Vol. 338, pp. 455–460 (1990). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report Revision History:   22 February 2008 (Update of expi ration date and editorial changes ); 24 September 2001 (This revision reflects a 
change from reference values to information for aluminum, chromium, and sodium); 24  September 1993 (Original report date). 
 
 
 
 
Users of this RM should ensure that the report in th
contacting the SRM Program at:  telephone (301) 975-6776; fax (301) 926-4751; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via 
the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm.  

eir possession is current.  This can be accomplished by 

 

RM 8438 

Page 5 to 6 

 

APPENDIX A 
 
Collaborating Analysts 

 
W.T. Buckley, G. Wilson, and D. Godfrey, Agassiz Research Station, Agriculture Canada, Agassiz, BC, Canada. 
W.C. Cunningham, Division of Contaminants Chemistry, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, U.S. Food and 

Drug Administration, Washington, DC, USA. 
A. Farina Mazzeo, R. Piergallini, E.P. Salsano, and F. 

Superiore di Sanita, Rome, Italy.  

Abballe, Laboratory of Pharm aceutical Chemistry, Istituto 

C.T. Figueiredo and W.B. McGill, Department of Soil Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. 
K. Frank, J. Denning, and L. Hayne, Institute of Agri

culture and Natural Resources, Department of Agronomy, 

University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA. 

E.S. Gladney and E.M. Hodge, Health and Environmenta l Chemistry Group, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los 

Alamos, NM, USA. 

Shoals, AL, USA. 

R.D. Hauck and R.H. Scheib, Office of Agricultural and  Chemical Development, Tennessee Valley Authority, Muscle 

G.U. Hesselius, Mikro Kemi AB, Uppsala, Sweden.         
M. Ihnat, Centre for Land and Biological Resources Research, Agriculture Canada, Ottawa, ON, Canada. 
D.L. Jeffress and S. Allison, Feed Control Laboratory, Missouri Department of Agriculture, Jefferson City, MO, USA. 
L. Jorhem, E. Ericsson, and C.A. Yates, National Food Administration, Uppsala, Sweden. 
F.J. Kasler, Department of Chemistry, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA. 
G.W. Latimer Jr., W. Igler, L. Park, H. Hinojosa, C. Upton, and D. Arvelo, Agricultural An alytical Services, Office of 

H. Mauss, R.U. Haak, G. Haarman, and H. W. Oehmen, Zentrale Forschung und Entwicklung, Zentrale Analytik, 

the Texas State Chemist, College Station, TX, USA. 

Bayer AG, Leverkusen, Federal Republic of Germany. 

T.P. Mawhinney, R. Boles, R. Cathey, and P. Eggeman,  Experimental Station Laboratories, College of Agriculture, 

University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, MO, USA. 

J.S. Morris, V. Spate, C.K. Baskett, and D.E. Trockey,  Research Reactor Facility, Univ ersity of Missouri-Columbia, 

I.S. Palmer, O.E. Olson, Biochemistry Laboratories, Chemistry Department, South Dakota State University, Brookings, 

Columbia, MO, USA. 

SD, USA. 

L.J. Schmidt and U. Soni, Mass Spectrometry and Elemental Analysis Department, Shell Development Company, West 

Hollow Research Center, Houston, TX, USA. 

J. Schoenau, Department of Soil Science, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada. 
T.R. Shuler and F.H. Nielsen, Grand Forks Human Nutriti on Research Center, US Department of Agriculture, Grand 

R.J. Stevens and A. Beattie, Food and Ag ricultural Chemistry Research Division, Department of Agriculture (Northern 

J.T. Tanner and K.K. Cook, Nutrient Surveillance Branch , Division of Nutrition, US  Food and Drug Administration, 

Forks, ND, USA. 

Ireland), Belfast, Northern Ireland. 

Washington, DC, USA. 

C. Veillon, K.Y. Patterson, and N. Hardison, Vitamin and Mineral Nutrition Laboratory, Beltsville Human Nutrition 

Research Center, US Department of Agriculture, Beltsville, MD, USA. 

R.F. Walker, K. J. Thurlow, and G. Holcombe, Laboratory of the Government Chemist, Teddington, Great Britain. 
kura Agriculture Centre, Ministry of Agriculture and 
J.H. Watkinson and A.A. Judge, MAFTech Ruakura, Rua

G.M. Whitford, School of Dentistry, Department of Oral Biology - Physiology, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, 

Fisheries, Hamilton, New Zealand. 

GA, USA. 

P.C. Williams, Grain Research Laboratory, Canadian Grain Commission, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.        
W. Yuen, Saskatchewan Research Council, Saskatoon, SK, Canada. 
 
 
 
 

 

RM 8438 

Page 6 to 6 

