National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material® 882 
 
y  (65Ni 
Nickel-Copper Alloy (65Ni-31Cu-3Al) 
(granule form) 

- 

- 

 
This Standard Reference Material  (SRM) is intended primarily for use in validation of chemical and instrumental
 
methods of analysis for element contents of nickel and nickel-copper alloys and materials of similar matrix.  It can be 
containing 
used to validate value assignment of in-house reference materials.  A unit of SRM 882 consists of one bottle containing 
approximately 100 g of granules. 
 
Certified  Mass Fraction  Values:   Certified  values for constituents  of  SRM 882  are  reported  in Table  1  as mass 
fractions of the elements in a  nickel-copper alloy matrix [1].  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has 
the highest confidence in its accuracy in that all known or suspected sources of bias have been taken into account [2].  
A certified value is the present best estimate of the true value.  The certified values are metrologically traceable to the 
SI  derived unit   for  mass fraction   (expressed as percent) .    The expanded uncertainty estimates are expressed at a 
confidence level of approximately 95 %. 
 
 

tof  SRM 

Values  f 
Table 1.  Certified Mass Fraction Values for SRM 882 Nickel-Copper Alloy 

 
Constituent 

Aluminum (Al) 
Carbon (C) 
Copper (Cu) 
Iron (Fe) 
Nickel (Ni) 
Titanium (Ti) 

Mass Fraction 
(%) 

Expanded Uncertainty 
(%) 

 
 
 
 
 
 

2.845 
0.0065 

31.035 

0.0093 

65.25 

0.565 

 
 
 
 
 
 

0.054 
0.0016 
0.075 
0.0015 
0.11 
0.012 

. 

LT 

SRM 

in accordance with instructions given in this certificate (see 

 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 882 is valid indefinitely within the measurement uncertainty 
h  instructions  given  in  this  certificate  (see 
specified, provided the SRM is handled and stored 
. 
“Instructions for Handling, Storage, and Use”).  Periodic recertification of this SRM is not required.  The certification 
is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:   NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
surchaser. 
technical changes occur that affect the certification before the expiration of this certificate, NIST will notify the purchaser.  
Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination of technical measurements was performed by J.I.  Schultz, formerly of NIST .  Review and revision of 
values and uncertainty estimates were coordinated by J.R. Sieber of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Statistical consultation for this SRM was provided by A. Possolo of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Support aspects involved in the issuance of this SRM were coordinated through the NIST
Materials. 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
20
Certificate Issue Date:  20 April 2020 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

  Office of Reference 

were 

 

Page 1 of 4 

  

SRM 882 

k 

ANDLING,  STORAGE 

the 
. 

ncertainty  are  > 

is  certificate, divide the expanded uncertainty by  k = 2 to obtain the 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
The nickel-copper alloy granules may be analyzed in the as-received form.  To relate analytical determinations to the 
ing,  it 
certified values in this Certificate of Analysis, a minimum test portion of 500 mg should be used.  Before sampling, it 
is recommended to mix the  granules by inverting and rotating the bottle by hand for at least one minute.   A bottle 
containing unused material should be recapped immediately and stored at room temperature away from light. 
 
To use the uncertainty estimates given in th
combined standard uncertainty.  The effective degrees of freedom of the combined standard uncertainty are ≥ 60. 
 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
The material for SRM  882  was  prepared by water atomization at the
  (Sterling 
Forest, NY).  At NIST, the material was sieved to remove very coarse and very fine particles, thoroughly blended and 
bottled. 
 
Each certified value is a n unweighted mean of the results from the  methods listed in Table 2.  The uncertainty listed 
with each certified value is an expanded uncertainty about the mean, with coverage factor, k = 2, calculated following 
the ISO/JCGM Guide  [3-4].   Detailed descriptions of many of the methods of analysis may be found i
n Part  12, 
Chemical Analysis of Metals and Metal Bearing Ores, Annual Book of ASTM Standards for 1979 [5]. 
 
Analyses leading to the 
B.I. Diamondstone,  T.C. Rains,  M.B. Blackburn,  Y. Dokiya,  and R.K. Bell,   all  formerly  of the NIST Chemical 
Sciences Division.  Analytical determinations were also performed by 
S.W. Drigot,  GE Automatic Electric 
Laboratories, Inc . (N orthlake, IL);  M.M. Yanak,  International Nickel Co.
S. Kallmann, Ledoux & Company (Teaneck, NJ). 
 
 

value assignments   of this SRM were performed at NIST by 

, Inc. ( Sterling Forest , NY);  and 

  International Nickel Co., Inc.

E.R. Deardorff, 

Table 2.  Test Methods Employed in the Value Assignments of SRM 882 Nickel-Copper Alloy 

Value  Assignments  of  SRM 

 

 
 

Element 

Aluminum 

Carbon 
Copper 
Iron 
Manganese 
Nickel 
Silicon 
Sulfur 
Titanium 

Test Methods Used at NIST and Collaborating Laboratories 

 
Flame atomic absorption spectrometry (FAAS); Electrodeposition of Cu and Ni – NH4OH-
cupferron-NH4OH-8-quinolinol spectrophotometric; Hg cathode separation-cupferron-Al2O3 
gravimetric 
Combustion with infrared detection; Combustion with chromatographic detection 
Electrodeposition gravimetry 
FAAS; Spectrochemical 
Spark source mass spectrometry (SSMS); Atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) 
Gravimetric 
SSMS; AAS 
Combustion with iodometric titration; Combustion with infrared detection 
Hg cathode separation-chromotropic acid spectrophotometric; H2O2 photometric; Hg cathode 
separation-cupferron-H2O2 spectrophotometric; Hg cathode separation-diantipyrylmethane-
H2O2 spectrophotometric 

 

 
 

(1)   Certain commercial equipment, instruments or materials are identified in th

is certificate to adequately specify the 

experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
SRM 882 

Page 2 of 4 

ADDITIONAL CONSTITUENTS 
 
Noncertified values are provided for the following additional constituents in SRM 882.  These values are not certified, 
because NIST cannot vouch fully for the calibrations of the test methods and other details.   
 
Reference Mass Fraction Values:  Reference values for two constituents of SRM 882 are reported in Table 3 as mass 
fractions of the total elements in a nickel-copper matrix.  A NIST Reference Value is a non-certified value that is the 
present best estimate based on available data; however, the value does not meet the NIST criteria for certification and 
is provided with an associated uncertainty that may reflect only measurement  precision, may not include all sources 
of uncertainty, or may reflect a lack of sufficient statistical agreement among m ultiple analytical methods  [2].  The 
mass fraction reference values, as determined by the methods used, are expressed as percent.  Each reference value is 
an unweighted mean   of results obtained using the test method s  in Table  2.  The expanded uncertainty,  U, is  an 
expanded uncertainty about the mean, with coverage factor, k = 2 [3-4].  Results derived from the use of these values 
are considered by NIST to be traceable only to the values themselves. 
 

Table 3.  Reference Mass Fraction Values for SRM 882 Nickel-Copper Alloy 

tion 

Constituent 

Mass Fraction 
(%) 

Expanded Uncertainty 
(%) 

Silicon (Si) 
Sulfur (S) 

 
 

0.006 
0.0014 

 
 

0.002 
0.0007 

 
 
Information Mass Fraction Values:  Information values for constituents in SRM 882 are reported as mass fractions 
in Table 4.  A NIST Information Value is a value that may be of interest to the SRM user, but insufficient information 
is available to assess the uncertainty associated with the value  [2].  Information values cannot be used  to establish 
metrological traceability. 
 

Table 4.  Information Mass Fraction Values for SRM 882 Nickel-Copper Alloy 

‘alues  for  SRM

 

 

Constituent 

Arsenic (As) 
Boron (B) 
Chromium (Cr) 
Cobalt (Co) 
Lead (Pb) 
Magnesium (Mg) 
Manganese (Mn) 
Selenium (Se) 
Silver (Ag) 
Tin (Sn) 
Vanadium (V) 
Zinc (Zn) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Mass Fraction 
(%) 

0.0001 
0.0001 
0.0001 
0.007 
0.0006 
0.001 
0.0007 
0.0002 
0.0004 
0.003 
0.0001 
0.0005 

 
 
NOTICE TO USERS 
 
NIST strives to maintain the SRM inventory supply, but NIST cannot guarantee t he continued or continuous supply 
of any specific SRM.  Accordingly, NIST encourages the use of this SRM as a primary benchmark for the quality and 
accuracy of the user’s in -house reference materials and working standards.  As such, the SRM should be used to 
validate the more routinely used reference materials in a laboratory.  Compari sons between the SRM and in -house 
reference materials or working measurement standards should take place at intervals  appropriate to the conservation 
of the SRM and the stability of relevant in
implemented, contact NIST by email at srms@nist.gov. 
 
 

-house materials.  For further guidance on how this approach can be 

 

SRM 882 

Page 3 of 4 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Thompson, A.; Taylor,  B.N.;  Guide for the Use of the International System of Units

Publication 811; U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington,
https://www.nist.gov/pml/special-publication-811 (accessed Apr 2020). 

rial 
 (SI); NIST Special 

 DC (2008); available at 

[2]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of 
Reference Materials for Chemical Measurements; NIST Special Publication 260-136: U.S. Government Printing 
Office: Washington, DC (2000); available at https://www.nist.gov/system/files/documents/srm/SP260-136.PDF 
(accessed Apr 2020). 

[3]  Sieber, J.R., Possolo, A.M., Epstein, M.S., A Retuned Horwitz Procedure for Upgrading Certificates of Older 
; NIST Special Publication 260

Standard Reference Materials
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.260-198.pdf (accessed Apr 2020). 

-198; available at 
2¢ 

[4]  JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections) ; Joint Committee for Guides in  Metrology (JCGM) (2008); available at 
https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Apr 2020); see also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt,  C.E.;  Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results; NIST Technical Note  1297, U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington,
https://www.nist.gov/pml/nist-technical-note-1297 (accessed Apr 2020). 

 DC (1994); available at 

[5]  ASTM, Part 12, Chemical Analysis of Metals and Metal Bearing Ores; Annu. Book ASTM Stand., (1979).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Certificate Revision History:    20 April 2020  (Revised values and   uncertainties for Al, C, Cu. Fe and Ti; revised uncertainty for Ni; 
reassignment of values for Si and S as reference values; reassignment of
03 August 1979 (Original certificate date). 

 Mn value as an information value;  title update;  editorial changes); 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users of this SRM should ensure that the Certificate of Analysis in their possession is
accomplished by contacting the SRM Program: telephone (301)
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 882 

Page 4 of 4 

 current.  This can be 

 975-2200; fax (301)

 948-3730; 

