A*  heh. 

. 
WSitiuie  OT  Olanoarus  ce  Werhinology 

cg  Qt 

Hr 

% 

Oo. 

. 

Y 

¥ 

Certificate  of  Analusis 

Standard  Reference  Material®  886 

Refractory  Gold  Ore 

(In  Cooperation  with  the  American  Society  for  Testing  and  Materials) 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  a  refractory  gold  ore  of  the  Carlin  type,  in  the  form  of  fine  powder 
(nominal  particle  size  between  50  and  100  wm  (<150,  >300  mesh)).  SRM  886  is  intended  for  use  in  evaluating 
chemical  and  instrumental  methods  for  the  analysis  of  gold  ores. 

The  SRM  is  provided  as  a  200  g 

unit. 

The  certified  values  for  the  gold  and  sulfur  concentration  are  reported  on  an  as-received  basis. 
The  value  for  gold 
was  determined  by  gravimetric  fire  assay  and  by  acid  decomposition-HBr  extraction-atomic  absorption  spectrometry, 
and  is  the  present  "best  estimate"  of  the  true  value.  The  certified  value  for  sulfur  was  determined  by  isotope  dilution 
thermal  ionization  mass  spectrometry  following  Carius  tube  decomposition  [1]  of  samples  of  0.1  g  to  0.2  g. 

1 

* 

tla 

No 
The  uncertainty  stated  for  gold  includes  between-laboratory  and  within-laboratory  components  of  uncertainty. 
The  uncertainty  stated  for  sulfur  includes  a  component 
material  variability  was  detected  for  samples  of  5  g  or  more. 
2  naesnnean 
of  uncertainty  for  material  variability  (the  standard  uncertainty  for  this  source  is  approximately  3%  relative),  as  well 
as  components  of  uncertainty  due  to  the  measurement  process. 
Uncertainties  are  expanded  as  described  in  reference 
{2}. 
Each  expanded  uncertainty  defines  a  range  of  values  for  its  certified  value  within  which  the  true  value  is 
believed  to  lie,  at  a  level  of  confidence  of  approximately  95%. 

Intdae 

Wfy 

df. 

Gold  concentration..... 

8.25 

Suifur  concentration..... 

1.466 

PLANNING,  PREPARATION,  TESTING,  ANALYSIS 

A  total  of  330  kg  was  dried  and  crushed  to  minus  7  mm  (-  1/4  in). 

The  SRM  gold  ore  was  collected  by  Newmont  Exploration  Limited,  Carlin,  NV  at  the  Carlin  black  carbon  ore 
The  material  was  then  ground  to 
stockpile. 
fine  powder  (98%  less  than  150  wm  (100  mesh))  by  Chemex  Laboratories,  Ltd.  in  Nevada  before  shipment  to  NIST 
as  a  candidate  SRM. 
Further  processing  to  segregate  the  middle  size  fraction  of  50  to  100  wm  (150  to  300  mesh)  from  the  coarser  and 
finer  fractions,  blending,  and  bottling  of  the  material  in  200  g  units  was  performed  by  the  U.S.  Geological  Survey 
under  contract  with  NIST.  The  middle  fraction  accounted  for  approximately  30%  of  the  original  sample.  One-gram 
samples  were  taken  prior  to  bottling  and  analyzed  for  gold  by  a  HBr/Br,  leach  procedure  to  assess  homogeneity. 
Since  the  leach  procedure  recovered  only  approximately  90%  of  the  gold  present,  further  homogeneity  assessments 
of  the  bottled  material  were  made  by  analyzing  20  ten-gram  samples  by  fire-assay  and  24  five-gram  samples  by  acid 
decomposition/solvent  extraction/atomic  absorption  analysis.  Samples  of  0.25  g  were  also  analyzed  for  carbon  and 
sulfur  by  combustion-IR  detection  to  further  assess  the  sample  homogeneity  prior  to  bottling. 
All  homogeneity 
measurements  indicate  that  material  variability  is  negligible. 

Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 
March  6,  1995 
(Revision  of  certificate  dated  4-12-93) 

(over)

Thomas  E  aS  Chief 
Standard  Reference  Materials  Program 

  

The  overall  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  certification  of  gold  were  performed  under  the 
direction  of  C.  Bucknam,  Newmont  Metallurgical  Services.  Mass  spectrometric  analyses  for  sulfur  were  performed 
by  W.R.  Kelly  and  R.D.  Vocke,  Jr.  of  the  NIST  Analytical  Chemistry  Division. 

Statistical  evaluation  of  the  certification  data  was  performed  by  S.B.  Schiller  of  the  NIST  Statistical  Engineering 
Division. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  SRM  were 
coordinated  through  the  Standard  Reference  Materials  Program  by  J.S.  Kane. 

ADDITIONAL  INFORMATION  ON  THE  COMPOSITION 

Specific  chemical  forms  of  carbon  and  sulfur  were  also  determined,  and  values  are  indicated  below. 
constituents  have  an  important  impact  on  the  selection  of  the  ore  beneficiation  process. 
but  are  reported  as  additional  information  on  the  composition  of  the  ore. 

These 
The  values  are  not  certified, 

Mineralogical  analyses  were  performed  by  X-ray  diffraction  and  X-ray  fluorescence  analysis  to  provide  bulk  matrix 
information. 

The  mineralogic  content  is  approximately: 

Constituent 

Carbon,  total 
Carbon,  inorganic 
Sulfate  Sulfur 
Sulfide  Sulfur 

Mineral 

Quartz 
Dolomite 
Calcite 
Sericite 
Kaolin 
Pyrite 

Concentration 
Wt  % 

5.7 
5.4 
0.7 
0.8 

34 
31 
20 
8 
4 
3 

Wt  % 

Cooperative  analyses  for  certification  were  performed  by  the  following  laboratories: 
Newmont  Metallurgical  Services,  Salt  Lake  City,  UT,  C.  Bucknam 
Newmont  Gold  Company,  Carlin,  NV,  P.  Braun 
Barrick  Goldstrike  Mines,  Carlin,  NV,  R.  Richardson 
Chemex  Laboratories,  Ltd.,  North  Vancouver,  BC  Canada,  L.  Twaites 
Amax  Gold  Company,  Winnemucca,  NV,  J.L.  Oleson 
U.S.  Geological  Survey,  Denver,  CO,  S.A.  Wilson 
Institute  of  Non-Ferrous  Metals,  Gliwice,  Poland,  W.  Stankiewicz,  M.  Brzezicka,  and  E.  Szmyd 

REFERENCES 

Kelly,  W.R.,  Paulsen,  P.J.,  Murphy,  K.E.,  Vocke,  R.D.,  Jr.,  and  Chen,  L-T,  (1994),  Anal.  Chem.  66: 

2505- 

[1] 
2513. 

[2] 

"Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in  Measurement",  ISBN  92-67-10188-9,  Ist  Ed.  ISO,  Geneva, 
Switzerland,  (1993). 

N

