National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 899 

 

 

 
Nickel-Base High-Temperature Alloy 
(Tracealloy C) 

 
aods 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended for use in the validation of chemical and instrumental methods 
ning 
high- 
for trace elemental analysis of high-temperature alloys.  A unit of  SRM 899 consists of a single bottle containing 
approximately 35 g of fine millings. 
 
Certified  Mass  Fraction  Values:    Certified  mass  fraction  values  for  constituents  of  SRM 899  are  provided  in 
Table 1 [1].  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy, in that all 
known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [2].  A certified value is the present 
best estimate of the true value based on the results of analyses performed at NIST and collaborating laboratories. 
 
Reference  Mass  Fraction  Values:    Reference  mass  fraction  values  for  constituents  of  SRM 899  are  provided  in 
Table 2.  Reference values are non-certified values that are the best estimates of the true values; however, the values 
all 
do not meet the NIST criteria for certification and are provided with associated uncertainties that may not include all 
sources of uncertainty [2]. 
 
Information Mass Fraction Values:  Information mass fraction values for constituents of SRM 899 are provided in 
Table 3.  An information value is considered to be a value that will be of interest to the SRM user, but insufficient 
information is available to assess the uncertainty associated with the value [2].  Information Values cannot be used 
to establish metrological traceability. 
 
Expiration  of  Certification:    The  certification  of  SRM 899  is  valid  indefinitely,  within  the  measurement 
uncertainties  specified,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this 
certificate (see  “Instructions for Use”).  Periodic recalibration or recertification of this SRM is  not required.  The 
certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance  of  SRM  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  material  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If 
the  purchaser.  
substantive 
Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination  of  technical  measurements  for  certification  of  this  SRM  was  performed  by  I.L. Barnes  of  the  NIST 
Chemical Sciences Division.  Review and revision of value assignments were performed by J.R. Sieber of the NIST 
Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Measurements for value assignment of SRM 898 were performed by J.W. Gramlich, H.M. Kingston, L.A. Machlan, 
E.J. Maienthal, J.D. Messman, P.J. Paulson, L.P. Powell, and T.C. Rains of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division; 
P. Cole  of  ATI  Allvac  (Monroe, NC);  G. Infantino  of  Evans  Analytical  Group  (Syracuse, NY);  L. Dilks  of 
Laboratory  Testing,  Inc.  (Hatfield, PA);  B. Guidoboni  of  Northern  Analytical  Laboratories,  (Londonderry, NH); 
L. Somrack of  NSL Analytical (Cleveland, OH); T. LeRoy and J. Capobianco of Vale Inco (Mississauga, Ontario, 
Canada);  G. Witt  of  ATI  Allegheny  Ludlum  (Brackenridge, PA);  S. Damp  of  Alcoa  Howmet  (Whitehall, MI); 
International 
C. Polinko  of  Carpenter  Technologies 
(Kokomo, IN);  J. Jordan  of  Huntington  Alloys  Corp.  (Huntington, WV);  and  D. Dorn  of  ATI  Wah  Chang 
(Albany, OR). 
 
Statistical consultation for this SRM was provided by D.D. Leber of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  05 February 2014 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

(Reading, Pennsylvania);  A. O’Connell  of  Haynes 

the  certification,  NIST  will  notify 

technical  changes  occur 

w  this  material  over  the  pe

that  affect 

Page 1 of 4 

  

SRM 899 

NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 
The  material  must  be  sampled  directly  from  its  original  container  and  used  without  additional  preparation.    The 
recommended minimum sample mass is 1.0 g.  SRM 899 should be stored in its original, tightly capped container in 
a cool, dry location. 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 
The preparation of material for SRM 899 was carried out by the Subcommittee on Trace Elements in Superalloys of 
the Gas Turbine Panel of the Joint Committee on the Effect of Temperature on the Properties of Metals, consisting 
of  members  from ASTM International, the American  Society of Mechanical Engineers,  and the Metals Properties 
Council.  The nominal composition of the nickel-base alloy contains all elements found in turbine blade applications 
and  was  designated  “Tracealloy”.    Approximately  135 kg  of  the  “Tracealloy”  composition  was  vacuum  induction 
melted.    Trace  element  master  alloys  were  added  under  partial  pressure,  and  a  set  of  ingots,  7.6 cm  diameter  and 
76 cm long, were statically cast.  Homogeneity studies showed no detectable segregation of the trace elements from 
top to bottom of the ingots.  At NIST, material from the lot was selected that exhibited minimal piping.  Following 
complete  removal  of  scale  and  cold  shuts  from  the  periphery  of  the  ingots,  the  material  was  converted  to  fine 
millings, sieved, and thoroughly blended to form SRM 899.  Quantitative determinations were performed at NIST 
and at collaborating laboratories using the test methods listed in Table 4.  Laboratories and analysts participating in 
the development and preparation of the materials are listed in Table 5. 
 
Certified Mass Fraction Values:  The values in Table 1 were derived from the combination of results provided by 
NIST  and  collaborating  laboratories.    The  measurands  are  the  total  mass  fractions  of  selected  elements  in  the 
nickel-base alloy.  The certified values are metrologically traceable to the SI unit of kilogram and are expressed as 
milligrams as per kilogram.  The values are the weighted means of the individual sets of measurements made by the 
laboratories estimated using a Gaussian random effects model [3] and the DerSimonian-Laird procedure [4,5].  Each 
associated  measurement  uncertainty  was  evaluated  by  the  application  of  the  parametric  statistical  bootstrap, 
consistent  with  the  ISO/JCGM  Guide  and  its  Supplement 1 [6,7].    The  uncertainty  is  expressed  as  an  expanded 
uncertainty, U, represented as U = kuc, where uc is intended to represent, at the level of one standard deviation, the 
combined  effect  of  between-laboratory,  within-laboratory,  and  inhomogeneity  components  of  uncertainty.    The 
coverage factor (k) corresponds to an approximately 95 % confidence level for each analyte.   
 
 

Constituent 

ass  Fraction  Value

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fraction Values for SRM 899  
 
Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 
 

Coverage Factor, k 
 

 
 
 
 

Lead (Pb) 
Selenium (Se) 
Tellurium (Te) 
Thallium (Tl) 

  3.928  ±  0.089 
  9.36 
  5.72 
  0.273  ±  0.022 

±  0.24 
±  0.34 

 
 
 
 

2.0 
2.0 
2.0 
2.0 

 
 
Reference Mass Fraction Values:  The values in Table 2 were derived from the combination of results provided by 
collaborating laboratories.  The measurands are the mass fractions of selected elements in the nickel-base alloy, as 
determined by the listed test methods in Table 4.  The reference values are metrologically traceable to the SI unit of 
kilogram and are expressed as milligrams as per kilogram.  The values are the weighted means of the individual sets 
of  measurements  made  by  the  laboratories  estimated  using  a  Gaussian  random  effects  model [3]  and  the 
DerSimonian-Laird procedure [4,5].  Each associated measurement uncertainty was evaluated by the application of 
the  parametric  statistical  bootstrap,  consistent  with  the  ISO/JCGM  Guide  and  its  Supplement 1 [6,7].    The 
uncertainty is expressed as an expanded uncertainty, U, represented as U = kuc, where uc is intended to represent, at 
the  level  of  one  standard  deviation,  the  combined  effect  of  between-laboratory,  within-laboratory,  and 
inhomogeneity  components  of  uncertainty.    The  coverage  factor (k)  corresponds  to  an  approximately  95 % 
confidence level for each analyte.   

                                                 

(1)  Certain  commercial  organizations,  services,  equipment,  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately 
specify the experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute 
of Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the organizations, services, materials, or equipment identified are necessarily 
the best available for the purpose. 
SRM 899 

Page 2 of 4 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

‘alue 

Constituent 

Table 2.  Reference Mass Fraction Values for SRM 899  
 
Mass Fraction  
(mg/kg) 
 
±  0.07 
±  0.02 
±  0.4 
±  0.4 
±  0.3 

  1.53 
  0.24 
  6.0 
  0.8 
  4.2 

Antimony (Sb) 
Bismuth (Bi) 
Gallium (Ga) 
Silver (Ag) 
Tin (Sn) 

2.0 
2.0 
2.0 
2.0 
2.0 

Coverage Factor, k 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Information Mass Fraction Values:  In Table 3, the values for all listed constituents are intended to provide the 
base composition of the “Tracealloy” material.  The values were provided by the committee that designed the alloy.   
 
 

Table 3.  Information Mass Fraction Values for SRM 899  
 

Value

Constituent 

Constituent 

Mass Fraction 
(%) 
 

2 
0.01 
0.12 
8.5 
12 
1.2 

  Niobium (Nb) 
  Nickel (Ni) 
  Tantalum (Ta) 
  Titanium (Ti) 
  Tungsten (W) 
  Zirconium (Zr) 

Mass Fraction 
(%) 
 

0.9 
Balance 
1.75 
2 
1.75 
0.1 

Aluminum (Al) 
Boron (B) 
Carbon (C) 
Cobalt (Co) 
Chromium (Cr) 
Hafnium (Hf) 

Table 4.  Methods Used for Analysis of SRM 899  
 

Constituent 

Methods(a) 

Constituent 

Methods(a) 

Ag 
Bi 
Ga 
Pb 
Sb 

3 
3, 4 
3 
1, 3, 4 
3 

Se 
Sn 
Te 
Tl 

 

2, 3, 4 
3 
2, 4 
1, 3 
 

(a)  Key to Methods: 

1. 
Isotope dilution thermal ionization mass spectrometry 
2. 
Isotope dilution spark source mass spectrometry 
3. 
Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry [8] 
4.  Graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometry [9] 

Table 5.  Laboratories Collaborating in the Development of “Tracealloy” Materials 

Acculabs – R. Brown 
Falconbridge – L. Morris 
INCO – C. David 
Misco-Howmet – D. Preston 
Special Metals – M. Harrington 
TRW – L. Harper 
Universal-Cyclops – L. Lherbier,  
– A. Mirarchi 

 

Cartech –  R. Whitney 

Cannon Muskegon – R. Schwer 
Howmet Alloy Division – J. White  Huntington Alloys – D. Carlson 
J. Dirats & Co. – E. Dirats 
Pratt & Whitney – J. Marks 
Stellite-Cabot – J. McLafferty 
Union Carbide Metals – C. Brown  Union Carbide - UK – I. Nolleth 
Westinghouse – G. Beck 

Lycoming – R. Sussman 
SNECMA – M. Frerre 
Teledyne Allvac – W. Thomas 

Wyman Gordon – R. Sparks 

SRM 899 

Page 3 of 4 

REFERENCES 

  
[1]  Thompson, A.; Taylor, B.N.; Guide for the Use of the International System of Units (SI); NIST Special 

Publication 811; U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (2008) available at 
http://physics.nist.gov/Pubs (accessed Feb 2014). 

[2]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value Assignment of 
Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136  (2000);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF (accessed Feb 2014). 

[3]  Searle,  S.  R.;  Casella,  G.  and  McCulloch,  C.  E.  (2006)  "Variance  Components",  John  Wiley  &  Sons, 

Hoboken, NJ. 

[4]  Dersimonian, R.; Laird, N.; Meta-Analysis in Clinical Trials; Control Clin. Trials, Vol. 7, pp. 177−188 (1986).  
[5]  Rukhin, A.L.; Weighted Means Statistics in Interlaboratory Studies; Metrologia, Vol. 46, pp. 323−331 (2009). 
[6]  JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(GUM 1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Feb  2014);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/physlab/pubs/index.cfm (accessed Feb 2014). 

[7]  JCGM 101:2008;  Evaluation  of  Measurement  Data  –  Supplement 1  to  the  “Guide  to  the  Expression  of 
Uncertainty  in  Measurement”  -  Propagation  of  Distributions  using  a  Monte  Carlo  method;  JCGM  (2008); 
available at http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_101_2008_E.pdf (accessed Feb 2014). 
[8]  ASTM E1834–11; Standard Test Method for Analysis of Nickel Alloys by Graphite Furnace Atomic Absorption 

Spectrometry, Annu. Book of ASTM Stand., Vol. 03.05 (2011).  

{  Stand.,  Vol. 

[9]  ASTM E2823–11;  Standard  Test  Method  for  Analysis  of  Nickel  Alloys  by  Inductively  Coupled  Plasma  Mass 

Spectrometry (Performance-Based Method), Annu. Book of ASTM Stand., Vol. 03.05 (2011). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Certificate Revision History:  05 February 2014 (Revision of certified values and uncertainties for Se, Te, Tl, and Pb and new reference values 
for  Ga,  Ag,  Sn,  Sb, and Bi based  on  re-evaluation  of  the  original  and  new  analytical  results;  editorial  changes);  31 August 1983  (Revision  of 
 
value and uncertainty for lead); 08 August 1980 (Original certificate date). 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This  can  be 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
mail 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program:    telephone  (301)  975-2200;  fax  (301)  948-3730,  email 
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm.  
 

values 
wan 

SRM 899 

Page 4 of 4 

