 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE:  07 August 2014 
 
Product Identifier 

SRM Number:  1599 
SRM Name: 

Anticonvulsant Drug Level Assay Standard 

Under the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 29 CFR 1910.1200, 
this  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  NOT  classified  as  a  physical  hazard  or  a  health  hazard,  a  simple 
asphyxiant, combustible dust, pyrophoric gas, or hazard not otherwise classified. There are no hazard pictograms, 
hazard statements or signal word associated with it.  Safety Data Sheet information is not required.  This document 
may be used in conjunction with your hazard communication program. 
 
Exemption:    1910.1200  (b)  (6)  (xii).    This  SRM  is  a  biological  material  and  should  be  considered  a  potential 
biological hazard. 
 
Description:    This  SRM  is  certified  for  the  concentrations  of  two  anticonvulsant  drugs  (valproicacid  and 
carbamazepine) in a processed human serum base.  It is intended for use in the calibration and standardization of 
procedures employed in clinical laboratories for the determination of these drugs in serum.  It can also be used for 
the  critical  evaluation  of  working  or  secondary  reference  solutions  prepared  either  in-house  or  by  a  commercial 
supplier.  This SRM is supplied as a set of four different freeze-dried preparations (three different concentrations 
and a blank). 
 
Additional  Notes  for  Biomaterials:    SRM 1599  IS  INTENDED  FOR  IN-VITRO  DIAGNOSTIC  USE  ONLY.  
THIS  IS  A  HUMAN  SOURCE  MATERIAL.    HANDLE  PRODUCT  AS  A  BIOHAZARDOUS  MATERIAL 
CAPABLE  OF  TRANSMITTING  INFECTIOUS  DISEASE.    The  supplier  of  this  serum  has  reported  that  this 
product  has  been  tested  by  an  FDA-approved  method  and  found  non-reactive/negative  hepatitis  B  antigen.  
However, no known test method can offer complete assurance that hepatitis B virus, or other infectious agents are 
absent from this material.  Accordingly, this human blood-based product should be handled at the Biosafety Level 2 
or higher as recommended for any potentially infectious human serum or blood specimen by the Centers for Disease 
Control  and  Prevention (CDC)  Office  of  Safety,  Health,  and  Environment  and  the  National  Institutes  of 
Health (NIH).  See Certificate of Analysis for storage and use instructions.   
 
Disposal:  SRM 1599 components and derived solutions should be disposed of in accordance with local, state, and 
federal regulations. 
 
Transport  Information:    This  material  is  not  regulated  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Transportation (DOT)  and/or 
International Air Transportation Association (IATA). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:     This document  was  prepared carefully,  using  current  references.   Users of  this  SRM should  ensure 
that  this  document  and  the  corresponding  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  are  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program:    telephone  (301)  975-2200;  fax  (301)  948-3730;  e-mail 
srmmsds@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

SRM 1599 

 

Page 1 of 1 

