Date of Issue:  
16 July 2018 

 

SAFETY DATA SHEET 

 

1.  SUBSTANCE AND SOURCE IDENTIFICATION  

Product Identifier 
SRM Number: 
SRM Name: 
Other Means of Identification:  Not Applicable. 

1848 
Lubricating Oil Additive Package 

Recommended Use of This Material and Restrictions of Use 

This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  the  evaluation  of  methods  and  the 
calibration of equipment  used in the analysis of lubricating oil additive packages, engine lubricating oils, and 
materials  of  a  similar  matrix.    A  unit  of  SRM 1848  consists  of  an  amber  borosilicate  glass  bottle  containing 
approximately 100 g of material. 

Company Information 

National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Standard Reference Materials Program 
100 Bureau Drive, Stop 2300 
Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899-2300 
 
Telephone:  301-975-2200 
FAX:  301-948-3730 
E-mail:  SRMMSDS@nist.gov 
Website:  https://www.nist.gov/srm 

 
 
 
 
 
Emergency Telephone ChemTrec: 
1-800-424-9300 (North America) 

+1-703-527-3887 (International) 

 

2.  HAZARDS IDENTIFICATION 

Classification  

Physical Hazard: Not classified. 
Health Hazard:  Skin Corrosion/Irritation 
 
 

Eye Damage/Irritation  

Category 2 
Category 2B 

Label Elements 
Symbol 

 

Signal Word 
WARNING 

Hazard Statement(s) 
H315 
H320 

Causes skin irritation. 
Causes eye irritation. 

Precautionary Statement(s): 

Wash hands thoroughly after handling. 
Wear protective gloves, protective clothing, and eye protection. 

P264 
P280 
 
P302+P352 
P333+P313 
 
P305+P351+P338  If in eyes:  Rinse cautiously with water for several minutes.  Remove contact lenses if present 

If on skin: Wash with plenty of soap and water. 
If skin irritation occurs: Get medical attention. 

P337+P313 
 
P362+P364 

SRM 1848 

and easy to do.  Continue rinsing. 
If eye irritation persists: Get medical attention. 

Take off contaminated clothing and wash it before reuse. 

 

Page 1 of 6 

Hazards Not Otherwise Classified:  Not applicable. 

Ingredients(s) with Unknown Acute Toxicity:  Not applicable. 

3.  COMPOSITION AND INFORMATION ON HAZARDOUS INGREDIENTS 

Substance:  Lubricating Oil Additive Package.  
Other Designations:  Petroleum oil with additives, passenger car motor oil additive. 

NOTE:  This material is a complex mixture which may contain minor components, some of which have been reported 
to  have  toxic  or  irritant  properties  but  are  below  the  established  OSHA  cut-off  values  for  mixtures  or  solutions.  
Components are listed below are in compliance with OSHA 29 CFR 1910.1200. 

Hazardous Components 

CAS Number 

Lubricating Oil Additive Package 

not applicable 

EC Number 
(EINECS) 
not applicable 
 

Nominal Mass Concentration 
(%) 
100 
 

64741-96-4 
not available 
not available 

265-159-2 
not available 
not available 

87 to 94 
5 to 9.9 
0.5 to 1.5 

Major Components 
Distillates, petroleum, solvent-refined 
heavy naphthenic 
Zinc alkyldithiophosphate 
Magnesium sulfonate 

 

 

 

4. FIRST AID MEASURES 

Description of First Aid Measures:  

Inhalation:  If adverse effects occur, remove to uncontaminated area.  If not breathing, give artificial respiration 
or oxygen by qualified personnel.  Seek immediate medical attention. 

Skin Contact:  Wash exposed skin with soap and water for at least 15 minutes.  Seek medical attention if needed. 

Eye Contact:  Immediately flush eyes, including under the eyelids with copious amounts of water for at least 
15 minutes.  Seek immediate medical attention. 

Ingestion:  Aspiration hazard.  Do not induce vomiting.  If vomiting occurs, keep head lower than hips to prevent 
aspiration.  If not breathing, give artificial respiration by qualified personnel.  Seek immediate medical attention. 

Most Important Symptoms/Effects, Acute and Delayed:  Skin and/or eye irritation. 

Indication of any immediate medical attention and special treatment needed, if necessary:  Not applicable. 

5.  FIRE FIGHTING MEASURES 

Fire and Explosion Hazards:  Slight fire hazard.  See Section 9, “Physical and Chemical Properties” for flammability 
properties. 

Extinguishing Media: 
 
 

Suitable:  Regular dry chemical, carbon dioxide, and regular foam. 
Unsuitable:  Water may cause splattering.   

Specific Hazards Arising from the Chemical:  None listed. 

Special Protective Equipment and Precautions for Fire-Fighters:  Avoid inhalation of material or combustion 
by-products.  Wear full protective clothing and NIOSH approved self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA). 

NFPA Ratings (0 = Minimal; 1 = Slight; 2 = Moderate; 3 = Serious; 4 = Severe) 

 

Health = 2 

Fire = 1 

Reactivity = 0 

6.  ACCIDENTAL RELEASE MEASURES 

Personal Precautions, Protective Equipment and Emergency Procedures:  Use suitable protective equipment; 
see Section 8, “Exposure Controls and Personal Protection”. 

Methods and Materials for Containment and Clean up:  Absorb spilled material with sand or non-combustible 
material and collect in appropriate container for disposal. 

SRM 1848 

 

Page 2 of 6 

7.  HANDLING AND STORAGE 

Safe Handling Precautions:  See Section 8, “Exposure Controls and Personal Protection”. 

Storage:    Store  and  handle  in  accordance  with  all  current  regulations  and  standards.    The  storage  floor  must  be 
impermeable and form a collecting basin so that, in the event of an accident spillage, the liquid cannot spread beyond 
the storage area. 

8.  EXPOSURE CONTROLS AND PERSONAL PROTECTION 

Exposure Limits: 

NIOSH (REL): 
ACGIH (TLV):  
OSHA (PEL): 

No exposure limits established. 
No exposure limits established. 
No exposure limits established. 

Engineering Controls:   Provide  local  exhaust  or  process  enclosure  ventilation  system.  Ensure  compliance  with 
applicable exposure limits. 

Personal Protection Measures:  In accordance with OSHA 29 CFR 1910.132, subpart I, wear appropriate Personal 
Protective Equipment (PPE) to minimize exposure to this material. 

Respiratory Protection:    If workplace conditions warrant a respirator, a respiratory protection program that 
meets  OSHA 29CFR 1910.134  must  be  followed.    Refer  to  NIOSH  42 CFR 84  for  applicable  certified 
respirators. 

Eye/Face Protection:  Wear splash resistant safety goggles with a face shield. An eye wash station should be 
readily available near areas of use. 

Skin and Body Protection:  Personal protective equipment for the body should be selected based on the task 
being performed and the risks involved and should be approved by a specialist before handling this product. 
Chemical-resistant gloves should be worn at all times when handling chemicals. 

9.  PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES 

 

Descriptive Properties: 

Appearance (physical state, color, etc.): 
Molecular Formula: 
Molar Mass (g/mol): 
Odor: 
Odor threshold: 
pH: 
Evaporation rate: 
Melting point/freezing point: 
Relative Density (water=1): 
Vapor Pressure: 
Vapor Density: 
Kinematic Viscosity (at 40 °C)(a): 
Solubility(ies): 
Partition coefficient (n-octanol/water): 

Thermal Stability Properties: 

Autoignition Temperature: 
Thermal Decomposition: 
Initial boiling point (°C): 
Explosive Limits, LEL (%): 
Explosive Limits, UEL (%): 
Flash Point (PMCC)(a): 
Flammability (solid, gas): 
(a) Value from Certificate of analysis. 
10.  STABILITY AND REACTIVITY 

 
dark, viscous liquid 
not applicable 
not applicable 
mild oil smell 
not available 
not available 
not available 
not available 
0.95 at 15.6 °C  
<0.1 mmHg 20°C 
not available 
4000 cSt 
insoluble in water 
not available 
 
not available 
not available 
>260 (500 °F) 
0.6 
7 
173°C (343 °F)  
not applicable 

Reactivity:  Stable at normal temperatures and pressure. 

Stability: 

X 

Stable 

 

Unstable 

Possible Hazardous Reactions:  None listed. 

SRM 1848 

 

Page 3 of 6 

Conditions to Avoid:  Avoid heat, flames, sparks and other sources of ignition.  Avoid contact with incompatible 
materials. 

Incompatible Materials:  Acids, oxidizers, halogens and halogenated compounds. 

Fire/Explosion Information:  See Section 5, “Fire Fighting Measures”. 

Hazardous Decomposition:  Carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, aldehydes, hydrogen sulfide, alkyl mercaptans, and 
oxides of carbon.  

Hazardous Polymerization: 
 

11.  TOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION 

  Will Occur 

X  Will Not Occur 

Route of Exposure: 

X 

Inhalation 

X 

Skin 

X 

Ingestion 

Symptoms Related to the Physical, Chemical and Toxicological Characteristics: Skin and/or eye irritation. 

Potential Health Effects (Acute, Chronic and Delayed): 

Inhalation:  Acute exposure to mists or sprays of insoluble mineral oils are usually not harmful to the respiratory 
tract; however, discomfort may occur at concentrations above 5 mg/m3.  Prolonged or repeated exposure may 
cause fibrotic nodules, lipid pneumonia, and lipid granuloma. 

Skin Contact:  Acute exposure may cause oil folliculitis due to the mechanical plugging of the hair follicles.  
Some people may develop sensitivity to petroleum products or additives used in petroleum products.  Chronic 
skin exposure may cause defatting and drying of the skin resulting in irritation and dermatitis. 

Eye Contact:  Acute exposure to liquid or mist may cause irritation.  Repeated exposure may cause conjunctivitis. 

Ingestion:  Acute exposure by ingestion may cause gastrointestinal disturbances such as diarrhea. 

Numerical Measures of Toxicity: 

Acute Toxicity:  Not classified. 
  Lubricating Oil Additive Package:  Rat, Oral LD50:  >5000 mg/kg 
 

Rabbit, Dermal LD50:  >2000 mg/kg 

 

Skin Corrosion/Irritation:  Category 2, Mixture may cause skin irritation. 

Serious Eye Damage/Eye Irritation:  Category 2B, Mixture may cause moderate to strong eye irritation. 

Respiratory Sensitization:  No data available. 

Skin Sensitization:  No data available. 

Germ Cell Mutagenicity:  No data available. 

Carcinogenicity:  Not classified. 

Listed as a Carcinogen/Potential Carcinogen 

 

Yes 

X  No 

Hazardous  components  listed  in  this  SDS  are  not  listed  by  NTP,  IARC,  or  OSHA  as  a  carcinogen/potential 
carcinogen. 

Reproductive Toxicity:  Not classified. 

Specific Target Organ Toxicity, Single Exposure:  Not classified. 

Specific Target Organ Toxicity, Repeated Exposure:  Not classified. 

Aspiration Hazard:  Not classified.  

This  material  does  not  pose  an  aspiration  hazard  due  to  the  high  viscosity  (see  Section  9,  “Physical  and 
Chemical Properties”).  

12.  ECOLOGICAL INFORMATION 

Ecotoxicity Data:   

  Lubricating Oil Additive Package: 

 
 

 
 

Freshwater Fish Toxicity: Acute LC50 is 10 mg/L to 100 mg/L 
Freshwater Invertebrates Toxicity: Acute EC50 is 100 mg/L to 1000 mg/L 

Persistence and Degradability:  No data available 

SRM 1848 

 

Page 4 of 6 

Bioaccumulative Potential:  No data available. 

Mobility in Soil:  No data available. 

Other Adverse effects:  No data available. 

13.  DISPOSAL CONSIDERATIONS 

Waste Disposal:  Dispose of waste in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations. 

14.  TRANSPORTATION INFORMATION 

U.S. DOT and IATA:  This material is not regulated by IATA or DOT. 

15.  REGULATORY INFORMATION 

U.S. Regulations: 

CERCLA Sections 102a/103 (40 CFR 302.4):  Not regulated. 
SARA Title III Section 302 (40 CFR 355.30):  Not regulated. 
SARA Title III Section 304 (40 CFR 355.40):  Not regulated. 
SARA Title III Section 313 (40 CFR 372.65):  Not regulated. 
OSHA Process Safety (29 CFR 1910.119):  Not regulated. 
SARA Title III Sections 311/312 Hazardous Categories (40 CFR 370.21): 
Yes. 
Yes. 
No. 
No. 
No. 

ACUTE HEALTH: 
CHRONIC HEALTH: 
FIRE: 
REACTIVE: 
PRESSURE: 

State Regulations: 

California Proposition 65:  Not listed. 

U.S. TSCA Inventory:  Distillates, petroleum, solvent-refined heavy naphthenic is listed. 

TSCA 12(b), Export Notification:  Not listed. 

Canadian Regulations:  WHMIS Information is not provided for this material. 
 

 

SRM 1848 

 

Page 5 of 6 

16.  OTHER INFORMATION 

Issue Date:  16 July 2018 

Sources: 

ChemADVISOR, Inc., SDS, Severely Solvent-Refined Heavy Naphthenic Distillate, 15 December 2014. 

European  Chemical  Agency,  Registered  substances  (ECHA),  Distillates  (petroleum),  solvent-refined 
heavy  naphthenic,  CAS#  64741-96-4  available  at  http://echa.europa.eu/information-on-chemicals 
(accessed July 20185). 

Supplier Proprietary SDS, Passenger Car Motor Oil Additive, 5 December 2006. 

Key of Acronyms: 

ACGIH 
ALI 
CAS  
CERCLA   Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and 

American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists  NRC 
NTP  
Annual Limit on Intake 
OSHA  
Chemical Abstracts Service  
PEL  

Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
National Toxicology Program 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration  
Permissible Exposure Limit 

CFR  
DOT  
EINECS 

EPCRA  
IARC  
IATA  
IDLH  
LC50 
LD50 
LEL  
MSDS  
NFPA  
NIOSH  
NIST 

Liability Act  
Code of Federal Regulations  
Department of Transportation  
European Inventory of Existing Commercial Chemical 
Substances  
Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act  
International Agency for Research on Cancer  
International Air Transport Association  
Immediately Dangerous to Life and Health  
Lethal Concentration  
Median Lethal Dose or Lethal Dose, 50 % 
Lower Explosive Limit  
Material Safety Data Sheet  
National Fire Protection Association  
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health  
National Institute of Standards and Technology 

RCRA  
REL  
RQ  

Resource Conservation and Recovery Act  
Recommended Exposure Limit  
Reportable Quantity  

RTECS 
SARA  
SCBA  
SRM  
STEL  
TLV  
TPQ  
TSCA  
TWA  
UEL  
WHMIS  Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System 

Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances 
Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act  
Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus  
Standard Reference Material  
Short Term Exposure Limit  
Threshold Limit Value  
Threshold Planning Quantity  
Toxic Substances Control Act  
Time Weighted Average  
Upper Explosive Limit  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Disclaimer:   Physical  and  chemical  data  contained  in  this  SDS  are  provided  only  for  use  in  assessing  the 
hazardous nature of the material.  The SDS was prepared carefully, using current references; however, NIST does not 
certify the data in the SDS.    The certified values for this material are given in the NIST Certificate of Analysis. 

Users of this SRM should ensure that the SDS in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished by contacting 
the SRM Program: telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srmmsds@nist.gov; or via the Internet at 
https://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 1848 

 

Page 6 of 6 

