 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE:  05 June 2014 
 
Product Identifier 

 

 

SRM Number: 
SRM Name: 

2461 
Standard Cartridge Case 

Under the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 29 CFR 1910.1200, 
this  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  NOT  classified  as  a  physical  hazard  or  a  health  hazard,  a  simple 
asphyxiant, combustible dust, pyrophoric gas, or hazard not otherwise classified.  There are no hazard pictograms, 
hazard statements or signal word associated with it.  Safety Data Sheet information is not required.  This document 
may be used in conjunction with your hazard communication program. 
 
 
Exemption:    1910.1200(c).    This  SRM  is  an  Article,  as  the  word  is  defined  by  OSHA,  where  Article  means  a 
manufactured  item  other  than  a  fluid  or  particle:  (i)  which  is  formed  to  a  specific  shape  or  design  during 
manufacture; (ii) which has end use function(s) dependent in whole or in part upon its shape or design during end 
use; and (iii) which under normal conditions of use does not release more than very small quantities, e.g., minute or 
trace  amounts  of  a  hazardous  chemical  (as  determined  under  paragraph (d)  of  1910.1200),  and  does  not  pose  a 
physical hazard or health risk to employees. 
 
 
Description:  This SRM is intended primarily for use as a check standard for crime laboratories:  first, to help verify 
that the computerized optical equipment for cartridge case imaging acquisition and correlation is operating properly; 
second,  to  establish  ballistics  measurement  traceability  and  quality  assurance;  and  third,  to  facilitate  laboratory 
assessment and accreditation.  A unit of SRM 2461 consists of a circular electro-formed nickel plate replicated from 
the head of a fired master cartridge case, which contains a surface topography signature of a breech face impression, 
a firing pin impression, and an ejector mark. 
 
 
Disposal:  SRM 2461 should be disposed of in accordance with local, state, and federal regulations. 
 
 
Transport  Information:    This  material  is  not  regulated  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Transportation  (DOT)  and/or 
International Air Transportation Association (IATA). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:  This document was prepared carefully, using current references.  Users of this SRM should ensure that 
this  document  and  the  corresponding  Certificate  in  their  possession  are  current.    This  can  be  accomplished  by 
contacting the SRM Program:  telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srmmsds@nist.gov; or via the 
Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 2461 

 

Page 1 of 1 

