Date of Issue: 
03 June 2014 

 
SAFETY DATA SHEET 

 

1.  SUBSTANCE AND SOURCE IDENTIFICATION  

Product Identifier 
SRM Number: 
SRM Name: 
Other Means of Identification:  Not applicable. 

2587 
Trace Elements in Soil Containing Lead from Paint (Nominal 3000 mg/kg Lead) 

Recommended Use of This Material and Restrictions of Use 

This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended for use in the evaluation of methods and for the calibration 
of apparatus used to determine lead and other trace elements in soil.  SRM 2587 is composed of soil samples 
collected  from  a  suburban  garden  known  to  have  been  contaminated  by  lead  based  house  paint.    A  unit  of 
SRM 2587 consists of approximately 55 g of material with a particle size of <75 μm (200 mesh). 

Emergency Telephone ChemTrec: 

1-800-424-9300
+1-703-527-3887

(North America) 
(International) 

Not classified. 
Carcinogenicity – Category 1B 
Reproductive Toxicity – Category 1A 
Specific Target Organ Toxicity, Repeated Exposure – Category 2 

Company Information 

National Institute of Standards and Technology
Standard Reference Materials Program
100 Bureau Drive, Stop 2300 
Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899-2300 
 
Telephone:  301-975-2200 
FAX:  301-948-3730 
E-mail:  SRMMSDS@nist.gov 
Website:  http://www.nist.gov/srm 

2.  HAZARDS IDENTIFICATION 

Classification  

Physical Hazard: 
Health Hazard: 
 
 
Label Elements 
Symbol: 

 

Signal Word:  DANGER 

Hazard Statement(s): 
H350 
H360 
H373 

May cause cancer. 
May damage fertility or the unborn child. 
May  causes  damage  to  organs  (nervous  system,  kidneys,  liver,  blood)  through  prolonged  or 
repeated exposure. 

Precautionary Statement(s): 
P201 
P202 
P260 
P264 
P270 + P271  Do not eat, drink or smoke when using this product.  Use only in a well-ventilated area. 
P281 

Obtain special instructions before use. 
Do not handle until all safety precautions have been read and understood. 
Do not breathe dust. 
Wash hands thoroughly after handling. 

Use personal protective equipment as required. 

 

 

SRM 2587 

 

Page 1 of 6 

P308 + 313 
P405 
P501 

If exposed or concerned:  Get medical attention. 
Store locked up. 
Dispose of contents and container according to local regulations. 

Hazards Not Otherwise Classified:  Not applicable. 

Ingredients(s) with Unknown Acute Toxicity:  Not applicable. 

3.  COMPOSITION AND INFORMATION ON HAZARDOUS INGREDIENTS 

Substance:  Contaminated soil 

Other Designations:  Not applicable. 

Components are listed in compliance with OSHA’s 29 CFR 1910.1200; for the actual values see the NIST Certificate 
of Analysis.  Lead carbonate is the main source of lead from paint contained in this material.  The hazard information 
in this Safety Data Sheet is for basic lead carbonate. 

Hazardous Component(s) 

CAS Number 

Contaminated Soil 

Not available 

Individual Constituent(s) 
Basic lead carbonate 

 
 

1319-46-6 

EC Number 
(EINECS) 

Not available 
 
215-290-6 

Nominal Mass Concentration 
(%) 

100 
 
0.3 

 

4.  FIRST AID MEASURES 

Description of First Aid Measures:  

Inhalation:  If adverse effects occur, remove to uncontaminated area.  If not breathing, give artificial respiration 
or oxygen by qualified personnel.  Seek immediate medical attention. 

Skin Contact:  Wash skin with soap and water for at least 15 minutes.  If necessary, seek medical attention. 

Eye Contact:  Flush eyes with water for at least 15 minutes.  If necessary, seek medical attention. 

Ingestion:  If a large amount is swallowed, seek medical attention. 

Most Important Symptoms/Effects, Acute and Delayed:  Cancer, birth defects, reproductive effects. 

Indication of any immediate medical attention and special treatment needed, if necessary:  If any of the above 
symptoms are present, seek medical attention if needed. 

5.  FIRE FIGHTING MEASURES 

Fire  and  Explosion  Hazards:    Negligible  fire  hazard.    See  Section  9,  “Physical  and  Chemical  Properties”  for 
flammability properties. 

Extinguishing Media: 
 
 

Suitable:  Use extinguishing media appropriate for the surrounding area. 
Unsuitable:  None listed. 

Specific Hazards Arising from the Chemical:  None listed. 

Special Protective Equipment and Precautions for Fire-Fighters:  Avoid inhalation of material or combustion 
byproducts.  Wear full protective clothing and NIOSH approved self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA). 

NFPA Ratings (0 = Minimal; 1 = Slight; 2 = Moderate; 3 = Serious; 4 = Severe)  

 

Health = 1 

Fire = 0 

Reactivity = 0 

6.  ACCIDENTAL RELEASE MEASURES 

Personal Precautions, Protective Equipment and Emergency Procedures:  Keep unnecessary personnel away.  
Use suitable protective equipment; see Section 8, “Exposure Controls and Personal Protection”. 

Methods and Materials for Containment and Clean up:  Notify safety personnel of spills.  Collect spilled material 
in appropriate container for disposal.  Isolate hazard area and deny entry. 

SRM 2587 

 

Page 2 of 6 

7.  HANDLING AND STORAGE 

Safe Handling Precautions:  Avoid generating dust.  See Section 8, “Exposure Controls and Personal Protection”. 

Storage:  Store and handling in accordance with all current regulations and standards. 

8.  EXPOSURE CONTROLS AND PERSONAL PROTECTION 

Exposure Limits: 

OSHA (PEL):  15 mg/m3 (TWA, total particulates PNOR) 
 
NIOSH (REL): 
NIOSH (REL):  100.0 mg/m3 IDLH (as Pb, related Lead compounds) 

5 mg/m3 (TWA, respirable particulates PNOR) 

0.050 mg/m3 TWA (as Pb, related Lead compounds) 

Engineering Controls:   Provide  local  exhaust  or  process  enclosure  ventilation  system.  Ensure  compliance  with 
applicable exposure limits. 

Personal  Protection:    In  accordance  with  OSHA  29  CFR  1910.132,  subpart  I,  wear  appropriate Personal 
Protective Equipment (PPE) to minimize exposure to this material. 

Respiratory Protection:    If workplace conditions warrant a respirator, a respiratory protection program that 
meets  OSHA  29CFR  1910.134  must  be  followed.    Refer  to  NIOSH  42  CFR  84  for  applicable  certified 
respirators. 

Eye/Face Protection:  Wear splash resistant safety goggles with a face shield.  An eyewash station should be 
readily available near areas of use. 

Skin and Body Protection:  Personal protective equipment for the body should be selected based on the task 
being performed and the risks involved and should be approved by a specialist before handling this product.  
Chemical-resistant gloves should be worn at all times when handling chemicals. 

9.  PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES

 

Descriptive Properties: 

Appearance  
(physical state, color, etc.): 
Molecular Formula: 
Molar Mass (g/mol): 
Odor: 
Odor threshold: 
pH: 
Evaporation rate: 
Melting point/freezing point (ºC): 
Relative Density (g/L): 

Vapor Pressure (mmHg): 
Vapor Density (air = 1): 
Viscosity (cP): 
Solubility(ies): 

Soil 

powder 

not applicable 
not applicable 
not available 
not available 
not available 
not available 
not available 
not available 

not available 
not available 
not available 
not available 

Basic Lead Carbonate 

0.3 % 
not applicable 

(PbCO3)2Pb(OH)2 
775.70 
odorless 
not available 
not available 
not applicable 
not available 
6.75 to 6.85 (relative to 
water) 
not applicable 
not applicable 
not applicable 
insoluble in water and 
alcohol 
soluble in dilute acids 
not available 

not available 

Partition coefficient (n-octanol/water): 

Particle Size (if relevant) 

not available 

≤ 75 µm 

SRM 2587 

 

Page 3 of 6 

Thermal Stability Properties: 

Autoignition Temperature (ºC): 

Thermal Decomposition (ºC): 

Initial boiling point and boiling range (ºC): 

Explosive Limits, LEL (Volume %): 

Explosive Limits, UEL (Volume %): 

Flash Point (ºC) 

Flammability (solid, gas): 

 

not applicable 

not applicable 

not applicable 

not applicable 

not applicable 

not applicable 

not applicable 

 

not available 

not available 

decomposes 

not available 

not available 

not available 

not available 

10.  STABILITY AND REACTIVITY 

Reactivity:  Stable at normal temperatures and pressure. 

Stability: 

X 

Stable 

 

Unstable 

Possible Hazardous Reactions:  No data available. 

Conditions to Avoid:  Generating dust. 

Incompatible Materials:  No data available. 

Fire/Explosion Information:  See Section 5, “Fire Fighting Measures”. 

Hazardous Decomposition:  Oxides of lead and carbon. 

Hazardous Polymerization: 
 

11.  TOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION 

  Will Occur 

X  Will Not Occur 

Route of Exposure: 

X 

Inhalation 

X 

Skin 

 

Ingestion 

Symptoms Related to the Physical, Chemical and Toxicological Characteristics:  Fatigue, weakness, anorexia, 
anemia, jaundice, encephalopathy. 

Potential Health Effects (Acute, Chronic and Delayed): 

Inhalation:    Acute  health  effects  resulting  from  exposure  to  the  lead  carbonate  in  this  material  are  unlikely.  
Chronic exposure to lead compounds may result in accumulation in body tissues resulting in adverse effects on 
the blood, nervous system, heart, kidneys, endocrine and reproductive systems.  Lead has been shown to cause 
cancer and birth defects. 

Skin Contact:  No toxicity data available; dust may result in mechanical irritation. 

Eye Contact:  No toxicity data available; dust may cause mechanical irritation. 

Ingestion:  Ingestion of this material is unlikely under normal conditions of use.  Lead is a cumulative toxin and 
repeated exposures can cause high levels to build up.  Over exposure to lead, or lead compounds either through 
acute or chronic exposure, can result in severe damage to the nervous system, urinary system, and reproductive 
system.  Lead has been shown to cause cancer and birth defects. 

Numerical Measures of Toxicity:  

Acute Toxicity:  Not classified; no data available. 

Skin Corrosion/Irritation:  Not classified; no data available. 

Serious Eye damage/ Eye irritation:  Not classified; no data available. 

Respiratory Sensitization:  Not classified; no data available. 

Skin Sensitization:  Not classified; no data available. 

 

SRM 2587 

 

Page 4 of 6 

 

 

 

Germ Cell Mutagenicity:  Not classified; no data available. 

Carcinogenicity:  Category 1B 

Listed as a Carcinogen/Potential Carcinogen
NTP lists lead compounds as “reasonably anticipated to be human carcinogens”. 
IARC lists inorganic lead compounds in Group 2A (probably carcinogenic to humans).  Lead is not listed by 
OSHA. 

Yes 

No 

X 

 

 

Reproductive Toxicity:  Category 1A; lead crosses the placenta and may affect the fetus causing birth defects, 
mental retardation, behavioral disorders, and death during the first year of childhood. 

Specific Target Organ Toxicity, Single Exposure:  Not classified; no data available. 

Specific Target Organ Toxicity, Repeated Exposure:  Category 2; lead can accumulate in body tissues. 

Waste Disposal:  Dispose of waste in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations. 

Aspiration Hazard:  Not applicable. 

12.  ECOLOGICAL INFORMATION 

Ecotoxicity Data:  No data available. 

Persistence and Degradability:  No data available. 

Bioaccumulative Potential:  No data available. 

Mobility in Soil:  No data available. 

Other Adverse effects:  No data available. 

13.  DISPOSAL CONSIDERATIONS 

14.  TRANSPORTATION INFORMATION 

U.S. DOT and IATA:  Not regulated by DOT or IATA. 

15.  REGULATORY INFORMATION 

U.S. Regulations: 

CERCLA Sections 102a/103 (40 CFR 302.4):  Not regulated. 

SARA Title III Section 302 (40 CFR 355.30):  Not regulated. 

SARA Title III Section 304 (40 CFR 355.40):  Not regulated. 

SARA Title III Section 313 (40 CFR 372.65):  Not regulated. 

OSHA Process Safety (29 CFR 1910.119):  Not regulated. 

SARA Title III Sections 311/312 Hazardous Categories (40 CFR 370.21): 

ACUTE HEALTH: 
CHRONIC HEALTH: 
FIRE: 
REACTIVE: 
PRESSURE: 

Yes. 
Yes. 
No. 
No. 
No. 

State Regulations: 

California Proposition 65:   

WARNING!  This product contains a chemical (lead) known to the state of California to cause cancer. 

WARNING!    This  product  contains  a  chemical  (lead)  known  to  the  state  of  California  to  cause 
reproductive/developmental effects. 

U.S. TSCA Inventory:  Basic lead carbonate is listed. 

TSCA 12(b), Export Notification:  Not listed. 

Canadian Regulations: 

WHMIS Information:  Not provided for this material. 

 

SRM 2587 

 

Page 5 of 6 

16.  OTHER INFORMATION 

Issue Date:  03 June 2014 

Sources: 

ChemAdvisor, Inc., MSDS Basic Lead Carbonate, 21 March 2014. 

CDC;  NIOSH;  NIOSH  Pocket  Guide  to  Chemical  Hazards;  Department  of  Health  and  Human 
Services (DHHS), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), National Institute for Safety and 
at 
Health; 
http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npg/npgd0480.html (accessed June 2014). 

Not  Otherwise 

Particulates 

Regulated, 

4  April 

available 

2011; 

Key of Acronyms: 

ACGIH 

ALI 
CAS  
CERCLA  

CFR  
DOT  
EC50 
EINECS 

EPCRA  

IARC  
IATA  
IDLH  
LC50 
LD50 
LEL  
MSDS  
NFPA  
NIOSH  
NIST 

NRC

NTP 
OSHA 
PEL 

RCRA 
REL 
RM
RQ 

American Conference of Governmental Industrial 
Hygienists 
Annual Limit on Intake 
Chemical Abstracts Service  
Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act  
Code of Federal Regulations  
Department of Transportation  
Effective Concentration, 50 % 
European Inventory of Existing Commercial 
Chemical Substances  
Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know 
Act  
SARA 
International Agency for Research on Cancer 
SCBA 
International Air Transportation Agency 
SRM 
Immediately Dangerous to Life and Health 
STEL 
Lethal Concentration, 50 %  
TLV 
Lethal Dose, 50 % 
TPQ 
Lower Explosive Limit  
TSCA 
Material Safety Data Sheet  
TWA 
National Fire Protection Association 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health  UEL 
National Institute of Standards and Technology

RTECS

WHMIS

Nuclear Regulatory Commission 

National Toxicology Program 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
Permissible Exposure Limit 

Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
Recommended Exposure Limit  
Reference Material
Reportable Quantity 

Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances

Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act 
Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus  
Standard Reference Material  
Short Term Exposure Limit 
Threshold Limit Value  
Threshold Planning Quantity  
Toxic Substances Control Act  
Time Weighted Average  
Upper Explosive Limit  
Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Disclaimer:   Physical  and  chemical  data  contained  in  this  SDS  are  provided  only  for  use  in  assessing  the 
hazardous nature of the material.  The SDS was prepared carefully, using current references; however, NIST does not 
certify the data in the SDS.    The certified values for this material are given in the NIST Certificate of Analysis. 

Users of this SRM should ensure that the SDS in their possession is current. This can be accomplished by contacting 
the SRM Program: telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srmmsds@nist.gov; or via the Internet at 
http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 2587 

 

Page 6 of 6 

