Date of Issue: 

29 July 2015



SAFETY DATA SHEET



1. Substance and Source Identification 

	Product Identifier

		SRM Number:  4416H

	SRM Name:  Gallium-67 Radioactivity Standard 

	Other Means of Identification: Not applicable.  

	Recommended Use of This Material and Restrictions of Use

This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended primarily for the calibration of instruments that are used to measure radioactivity and for the monitoring of radiochemical procedures.  A unit of SRM 4416H consists of 5 mL of 2 M (7 %) hydrochloric acid in which a certified quantity of radioactive Gallium-67 is dissolved.

	Company Information

				National Institute of Standards and Technology

				

				Standard Reference Materials Program

				

				100 Bureau Drive, Stop 2300

				

				Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899-2300

				

				

	

				Telephone:  301-975-2200

	Emergency Telephone ChemTrec:

				FAX:  301-948-3730

			1-800-424-9300	(North America)

				E-mail:  SRMMSDS@nist.gov

				+1-703-527-3887	(International)

				Website:  http://www.nist.gov/srm

				

	

2. HAZARDS IDENTIFICATION

Radiological Hazard  

Warning:  THIS MATERIAL SHOULD ONLY BE USED BY PERSONS QUALIFIED TO HANDLE RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL!  

This product contains licensed radioactive material and is therefore subject to the requirements of 10 CFR Part 20 (e.g., public and occupational exposure limits, waste disposal).  At a minimum, the basic radiation safety principles of time, distance, and shielding, and appropriate radiation contamination control should be practiced to avoid/minimize any external and/or internal exposure.  Consult with your Radiation Safety office for your facility’s radiation safety requirements/precautions specific to the radionuclide(s) (including its activity and chemical/physical form) in this Radioactive SRM.

SRM 4416H is a radioactive material, Gallium-67, with a massic activity of approximately 210 MBq•g‐1 in hydrochloric acid solution. Gallium-67 decays by electron capture emission to excited levels of Zn-67.  During the decay process, X-rays and gamma rays with energies from 1 keV to 888 keV are also emitted.  

Classification 

	Physical Hazard:	There are no known physical hazards associated with this material.

		Health Hazard:	Skin Corrosion/Irritation 	Category 1B

			Serious Eye Damage/Irritation 	Category 1 

Label Elements

			Symbol 

			

			Signal Word

			DANGER

			Hazard Statement(s)

	H314	Causes severe skin burns and eye damage

	

Precautionary Statement(s)

	P260	Do not breathe fumes, mists, vapors, or spray.

	P264	Wash hands thoroughly after handling.

	P280	Wear protective gloves, protective clothing, and eye protection.

	P301+P330+P331	If swallowed: Rinse mouth.  Do NOT induce vomiting.

	P303+P361+P353	If on skin (or hair):  Remove immediately all contaminated clothing.  Rinse skin with water.

	P304+P340	If inhaled: Remove person to fresh air and keep comfortable for breathing.

	P305+P351+P338	If in eyes:  Rinse cautiously with water for several minutes.  Remove contact lenses, if present and easy to do.  Continue rinsing.

	P310	Immediately call a doctor.

	P363	Wash contaminated clothing before reuse.

	P405	Store locked up.

	P501	Dispose of contents and container according to local regulations.

Hazards Not Otherwise Classified:  None.

			Ingredients(s) with Unknown Acute Toxicity:  None.

3. COMPOSITION AND INFORMATION ON HAZARDOUS INGREDIENTS

	Substance:  Gallium-67 in 2 M Hydrochloric Acid.

	Other Designations:  

		Hydrochloric Acid:  Muriatic acid, chlorohydric acid, hydrochloride.

			Gallium-67:  Not applicable.

This SRM contains trace amounts of GaCl3.  Components are listed in compliance with OSHA’s 29 CFR 1910.1200; for the actual values see the NIST Certificate.  

Hazardous Component(s)

	CAS Number

EC Number

(EINECS)

	Nominal Mass Concentration
(%)

Hydrochloric Acid

		7647-01-0

231-595-7

	7

Gallium-67

	Not applicable

Not applicable

	0.0000009

Non-Hazardous Component(s)

	



	

Water

		7732-18-5

231-791-2

	>92



4. FIRST AID MEASURES

Description of First Aid Measures: 

Inhalation:  If adverse effects occur, remove to uncontaminated area.  If not breathing, give artificial respiration or oxygen by qualified personnel.  Seek immediate medical attention.

Skin Contact:  Rinse affected area with copious amounts of water followed by washing with soap and water for at least 15 minutes while removing contaminated clothing.  Seek medical attention, if needed.

Eye Contact:  Immediately flush eyes, including under the eyelids with copious amounts of water for at least 30 minutes.  Seek immediate medical attention.

Ingestion:  Contact a poison control center immediately for instructions.  Wash out mouth with water, but do not induce vomiting.  Seek medical aid at once, and bring the container or label.

Most Important Symptoms/Effects, Acute and Delayed:  Acid burns to skin and eyes.

Indication of any immediate medical attention and special treatment needed, if necessary:  If any of the above symptoms are present, seek immediate medical attention.  

5. FIRE FIGHTING MEASURES

Fire and Explosion Hazards:  Negligible fire hazard.  See Section 9, “Physical and Chemical Properties” for flammability properties.





Extinguishing Media:

		Suitable:  Use extinguishing media appropriate to the surrounding fire.

		Unsuitable:  None listed.

Specific Hazards Arising from the Chemical:  Hydrogen chloride.

Special Protective Equipment and Precautions for Fire-Fighters:  Avoid inhalation of material or combustion byproducts.  Wear full protective clothing and NIOSH approved self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA).

NFPA Ratings:  (0 = Minimal; 1 = Slight; 2 = Moderate; 3 = Serious; 4 = Severe)	

				Health = 3	Fire = 0	Reactivity = 0

6. ACCIDENTAL RELEASE MEASURES

This material is radioactive.  DO NOT touch spilled material.  Immediately notify safety personnel of a spill.

Personal Precautions, Protective Equipment, Methods and Materials for Containment and Clean up:

Radiological Emergency Procedures:

The following is a guide for first responders.  The following actions, including remediation, should be carried out by qualified individuals.  In cases where a life-threatening injury occurs concurrent with personal contamination, treat the injury first.  

Do not touch damaged packages or spilled material.  Handle as a radioactive material spill.  In addition to those actions described below, the guidelines in the Emergency Response Guidebook (ERG) provide more specific measures that should be followed.

Spill and Leak Control:

Alert and clear everyone from the area affected by the spill.

Take actions to limit the spread of contamination. 

Summon aid.

Damage to the Radioactive Source:

Evacuate the immediate vicinity around the source.

Place a barrier at a safe distance from the source.

Identify area as a radiation hazard.

Suggested Emergency Protective Equipment:

Gloves

Footwear Covers

Outer layer or easily removed protective clothing (as situation requires)

7. HANDLING AND STORAGE

Safe Handling Precautions and Storage:  This material is radioactive.  Store and handle in accordance with all current regulations and standards.  See NRC 10 CFR 20 or state regulations.  See Section 8, “Exposure Controls and Personal Protection”.  

8. EXPOSURE CONTROLS AND PERSONAL PROTECTION

Exposure Limits:

Gallium-67:

			ALIinh: 10 000 μCi or 370 MBq.  See NRC 10 CFR 20 Appendix B

			ALIing: 7000 μCi or 259 MBq

			OSHA:  See OSHA 29 CFR and NRC 10 CFR 20.	

		ACGIH:  See International Commission on Radiological Protection guidelines

Hydrochloric Acid:

		NIOSH (REL):	7 mg/m3; 5 ppm (Ceiling)

			75 mg/m3; 50 ppm (IDLH)

		ACGIH (TLV):	3 mg/m3; 2 ppm (Ceiling)

		OSHA (PEL):	7 mg/m3; 5 ppm (Ceiling)

Engineering Controls:  Provide local exhaust or process enclosure ventilation system.  Ensure compliance with applicable exposure limits.

Personal Protection:  In accordance with OSHA 29 CFR 1910.132, subpart I, wear appropriate Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) to minimize exposure to this material.

Respiratory Protection:  If workplace conditions warrant a respirator, a respiratory protection program that meets OSHA 29CFR 1910.134 must be followed.  Refer to NIOSH 42 CFR 84 for applicable certified respirators.

Eye/Face Protection:  Wear splash resistant safety goggles with a face shield.  An eye wash station should be readily available near areas of use.

Skin and Body Protection:  Wear protective clothing to prevent contact with skin.  Wear appropriate gloves.

9. PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES



Descriptive Properties:

Hydrochloric Acid (7 % of this SRM)

Appearance (physical state, color, etc.):

colorless to yellow liquid

Molecular Formula:

HCl

Molar Mass (g/mol):

36.46

Odor:

not available

Odor threshold:

not available

pH:

<2

Evaporation rate:

>1

Melting point/freezing point (ºC):

not available

Relative Density (g/L) as specific gravity (water = 1):

1 - 1.2

Vapor Pressure (mmHg):

not applicable

Vapor Density (air = 1):

0.7 (water)

Viscosity (cP):

14 mmHg at 20 ºC

Solubility(ies):

not available

Partition coefficient 
(n-octanol/water):

not available

Particle Size 

not applicable

Thermal Stability Properties:



Autoignition Temperature (ºC):

not applicable

Thermal Decomposition (ºC):

not applicable

Initial boiling point and boiling range (ºC):

not available

Explosive Limits, LEL (Volume %):

not applicable

Explosive Limits, UEL (Volume %):

not applicable

Flash Point (ºC):

not applicable

Flammability (solid, gas):

not applicable



10. STABILITY AND REACTIVITY

Reactivity:  This material is stable at normal temperatures and pressure.

Stability:

X

Stable



Unstable

Possible Hazardous Reactions:  None listed.

Conditions to Avoid:  Avoid contact with combustible materials and incompatible materials.

Incompatible Materials:  Cyanides, metals, amines, bases, metal carbide, oxidizing materials, acids, halo carbons, combustible materials, halogens, metal salts.

Fire/Explosion Information:  See Section 5, “Fire Fighting Measures”.

Hazardous Decomposition:  Hydrogen chloride. 

Hazardous Polymerization:



Will Occur

X

Will Not Occur



11. TOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION



Route of Exposure:

X

Inhalation

X

Skin

X

Ingestion

Symptoms Related to the Physical, Chemical and Toxicological Characteristics:  Burning pain and severe corrosive skin damage.  Permanent eye damage including blindness could result.





Potential Health Effects (Acute, Chronic and Delayed):

Inhalation:  Hydrochloric acid, if inhaled, can damage the mucous membranes and respiratory tract.  Short term exposure may cause irritation and inflammation of the upper respiratory tract, coughing, choking, sore throat, shortness of breath, headache, dizziness, and nausea.  Long term exposure to acid fumes may cause damage to teeth, bronchial irritation, chronic cough, bronchial pneumonia, and gastrointestinal disturbances.  

Skin Contact:  Hydrochloric acid can cause severe skin burns.  Severity of the damage depends on the concentration and duration of exposure.  Effects of acid burns may be delayed.

Eye Contact:  Hydrochloric acid can cause severe eye irritation, corneal burns, permanent eye damage, or blindness.  Severity of the damage depends on the concentration and duration of exposure.

Ingestion:  Ingestion of this material is unlikely under normal conditions of use.  If ingested, hydrochloric acid can cause severe burns and damage to the gastrointestinal tract.

Numerical Measures of Toxicity: 

Acute Toxicity:

	Hydrochloric acid,	Rat, Inhalation LC50:  3124 ppm (1 h)

		Rat, Oral LD50:  238 - 277 mg/kg

Skin Corrosion/Irritation:  This SRM contains 7 % hydrochloric acid and it is classified as Category 1.

Serious Eye Damage/Eye Irritation:  This SRM contains 7 % hydrochloric acid and it is classified as Category 1.

Respiratory Sensitization:  No data available.

Skin Sensitization:  No data available.

Germ Cell Mutagenicity:  No data available.

Carcinogenicity:  No data available.

Listed as a Carcinogen/Potential Carcinogen



Yes

X

No

Hydrochloric acid is not listed by NTP, IARC or OSHA as a carcinogen.

	Radiological Hazard:  Gallium-67

Ionizing radiation is a known carcinogen.

Reproductive Toxicity:  Not classified.

	Hydrochloric acid:	Rat, Inhalation TCLo:  450 mg/kg (1 h, prior to copulation 1 d)

Specific Target Organ Toxicity, Single Exposure:  No data available.

Specific Target Organ Toxicity, Repeated Exposure:  No data available.

Aspiration Hazard:  No data available.  

12. ECOLOGICAL INFORMATION

Ecotoxicity Data:

Component:  Hydrochloric Acid

Fish Toxicity:  Mosquitofish (Gambusia affinis) LC50 (static):  282 mg/L (96 h)

Invertebrate:  Shore crab (Carcinus maenas) LC50 (mortality):  240 mg/L (48 h)

Component:  Gallium-67

No ecotoxicity data listed.  

Persistence and Degradability:  No data available. 

Bioaccumulative Potential:  No data available. 

Mobility in Soil:  No data available.

Other Adverse Effects:  No data available.

13. DISPOSAL CONSIDERATIONS

Waste Disposal:  This material is radioactive.  Dispose in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations for RADIOACTIVE materials.  See NRC 10 CFR 20 subpart K.

14. TRANSPORTATION INFORMATION

U.S. DOT and IATA:  

Primary Risk:  UN2915, Radioactive Material, Type A Package, Hazard Class 7.

Subsidiary Risk:  Not applicable.

15. REGULATORY INFORMATION

U.S. Regulations:

CERCLA Sections 102a/103 (40 CFR 302.4):  Hydrochloric acid, 5000 lbs (2270 kg) final RQ.

SARA Title III Section 302 (40 CFR 355.30):  Hydrochloric acid, 500 lbs (227 kg) TPQ (gas only).

SARA Title III Section 304 (40 CFR 355.40):  Hydrochloric acid, 5000 lbs (2270 kg) EPCRA RQ (gas only).

SARA Title III Section 313 (40 CFR 372.65):  Hydrochloric acid, 1.0 % de minimis concentration

		(acid aerosols including mists, vapors, gas, fog, and other airborne forms of any particle size).

OSHA Process Safety (29 CFR 1910.119):  Not regulated. 

SARA Title III Sections 311/312 Hazardous Categories (40 CFR 370.21):

	ACUTE HEALTH:	Yes.

	CHRONIC HEALTH:	No.

	FIRE:	No.

	REACTIVE:	No.

	PRESSURE:	No.

State Regulations:

California Proposition 65:  No components are regulated.

U.S. TSCA Inventory:  Hydrochloric acid listed.

TSCA 12(b), Export Notification:  No components are listed.

Canadian Regulations:

WHMIS Information: Not provided for this material.

16. OTHER INFORMATION

Issue Date:  29 July 2015

	Sources:	ChemAdvisor, Inc., SDS Hydrochloric Acid, 20 March 2015.

		CDC; NIOSH; NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards; Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), National Institute for Safety and Health; Hydrochloric Acid, 18 November 2010; available at http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npg/npgd0447.html (accessed Jul 2015). 

			United States National Library of Medicine, Hazardous Substance Database (HSDB), Hydrochloric Acid; available at http://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/newtoxnet/hsdb.htm (accessed Jul 2015).

		United States National Library of Medicine, Hazardous Substance Database (HSDB), Gallium Radioactive; available at http://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/newtoxnet/hsdb.htm (accessed Apr 2015).

OSHA 29 CFR, Subpart Z, Ionizing radiation, 1910.1096.

NRC 10 CFR 20, Standards for Protection Against Radiation.

DOT 49 CFR 173, Shippers General Requirements for Shipments and Packages.

	


					Key of Acronyms:  

ACGIH

American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists

NIOSH 

National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health 

ALI

Annual Limit on Intake

NIST

National Institute of Standards and Technology

CAS 

Chemical Abstracts Service 

NRC

Nuclear Regulatory Commission

CEN

European Committee for Standardization

NTP 

National Toxicology Program

CERCLA 

Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act 

OSHA 

Occupational Safety and Health Administration 

CFR 

Code of Federal Regulations 

PEL 

Permissible Exposure Limit

CPSU

Coal Mine Dust Personal Sample Unit

RCRA 

Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 

DOT 

Department of Transportation 

REL 

Recommended Exposure Limit 

EC50

Effective Concentration, 50 %

RM

Reference Material

EINECS

European Inventory of Existing Commercial Chemical Substances 

RQ 

Reportable Quantity 

EPCRA 

Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act 

RTECS

Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances

IARC 

International Agency for Research on Cancer 

SARA 

Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act 

IATA 

International Air Transportation Agency 

SCBA 

SelfContained Breathing Apparatus 

IDLH 

Immediately Dangerous to Life and Health 

SRM 

Standard Reference Material 

ISO

International Organization for Standardization

STEL 

Short Term Exposure Limit 

LC50

Lethal Concentration, 50 % 

TDLo

Toxic Dose Low

LD50

Lethal Dose, 50 %

TLV 

Threshold Limit Value 

LEL 

Lower Explosive Limit 

TPQ 

Threshold Planning Quantity 

MSDS 

Material Safety Data Sheet 

TSCA 

Toxic Substances Control Act 

NFPA 

National Fire Protection Association 

TWA 

Time Weighted Average 

MSHA

Mine Safety and Health Administration

UEL 

Upper Explosive Limit 





WHMIS

Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System

					



































Disclaimer:  Physical and chemical data contained in this SDS are provided only for use in assessing the hazardous nature of this material.  The SDS was prepared carefully, using current references; however, NIST does not certify the data in the SDS.  The certified values for this material are given in the NIST Certificate.

Users of this SRM should ensure that the SDS in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished by contacting the SRM Program: telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srmmsds@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm.



			SRM 4416H		Page 7 of 7