S.  Department:of  Commerce 

Beeretary/   
Malcolm-Baldrige 

| 

5  .  8  w.  t 

National  Buresw  of $tandards 
Ernest  ‘Ambler,  Director 

National  Bureau  of  Standards 

Certificate  of  Analysis 

Standard  Reference  Material 

1218 

Low  Carbon  and  Sulfur  Silicon  Steel 

(In  Cooperation  with  the  American  Society  for  Testing  and  Materials) 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  consists  of  a  single  disk,  approximately  32  mm  (1  1/4  in)  in  diameter  and 
19  mm  (3/4  in)  thick.  SRM  1218  is  intended  for  use  in  optical  emission  and  x-ray  spectrometric  methods  of  analysis. 

Constituent 

Percent,  by  Weight’ 

Estimated  Uncertainty” 

  

Carbon 

Ma  anannacea 
AVA  BUOY 

Sulfur 

Copper 

Chromium 

Aluminum 

0.0029 

fiiaA 
ULF 

.0011 

.003 

.006 

.005 

0.0003 

nnt 
VU 

.0002 

.001 

.001 

.001 

"The  certified  value  listed  for  a  constituent  is  the  present  best  estimate  of  the  “true” 
value  based  on  the  results  of  the  cooperative  program  for  certification. 

"The  estimated  uncertainty  listed  for  a  constituent  is  based  on  judgment  and 
represents  an  evaluation  of  the  combined  effects  of  method  imprecision,  possible 
systematic  errors  among  methods,  and  material  variability. 
(No  attempt  was 
made  to  derive  exact  statistical  measures  of  imprecision  because  several  methods 
were  involved  in  the  determination  of  most  constituents.) 

The  overall  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  certification  were  performed  under  the  direction  of 
J.1.  Shultz,  Research  Associate,  ASTM-NBS  Research  Associate  Program. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  Standard  Reference 
Material  were  coordinated  through  the  Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials  by  W.P.  Reed. 

Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 
November  27,  1984 

Stanley  D.  Rasberry,  Chief 
Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials 

(over)

PLANNING,  PREPARATION,  TESTING,  ANALYSIS 

The  material  for  this  SRM  was  provided  by  Allegheny  Ludlum  Steel  Corporation,  Brackenridge,  Pa.  Homogeneity 
optical  emission  analysis,  J.A.  Norris;  chemical  analysis,  D.E.  Brown, 
testing  was  performed  at  NBS: 
B.I.  Diamondstone  and  R.K.  Bell,  ASTM-NBS  Research  Associate  Program. 

Cooperative  analyses  for  certification  were  performed  in  the  following  laboratories: 

Allegheny  Ludlum  Steel  Corporation,  Research  Center,  Brackenridge,  Pa.;  W.D.  Heavner. 

Armco  Inc.,  Research  &  Technology,  Middletown,  Ohio;  C.C.  Borland,  J.D.  Holland,  D.A.  Kopp,  J.  W.  Leeker, 

G.  D.  Smith,  R.L.  Swigert,  and  P.A.  Wombold. 

Howmet  Turbine  Components  Corporation,  Technical  Center,  Whitehall,  Mich.;  T.  Thornton. 

Inland  Stee!  Company,  Indiana  Harbor  Works,  East  Chicago,  Ind.;  D.E.  Smith. 

Leco  Corporation,  St.  Joseph,  Mich.;  R.B.  Fricioni. 

National  Bureau  of  Standards,  Inorganic  Analytical  Research  Division,  Gaithersburg,  Md.,  D.E.  Brown, 

B.I.  Diamondstone,  and  R.K.  Bell,  ASTM-NBS  Research  Associate  Program. 

Elements  other  than  those  certified  may  be  present  in  this  material  as  indicated  below.  These  are  not  certified,  but  are 
given  as  additional  information  on  the  composition. 

Element 

Concentration 
%  by  weight 

Ni 
P 
Ti 
Zr 

Co 

Mo 
Vv 
Si 
Ca 

(0.002) 
(  .002) 
(  .004) 
(  .002) 

(  .002) 

(  .003) 
(<.001) 
(3.2) 
(.0005  -  .0035)* 

*Calcium  is  heterogeneously  distributed  in  this  material.

