U.S.  Departmeit of  Commerce 
Malco: int  Baldrige 

National  Biirea re Standards 
Ernest  “amber,  Director 

caer 

National  Bureau  of  Standards 

Certificate 

Standard  Reference  Material  1357 

Certified  Coating  Thickness  Calibration  Standard 

(Nonmagnetic  Coating  on  Steel) 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  consists  of  four  30  x  30  mm  coating  thickness  plates  that  are  designed  for 
calibrating  thickness  gages  of  the  magnetic  type  used  to  measure  thicknesses  of  nonmagnetic  coatings  on  steel.  The 
coatings  are  electrodeposited  copper  with  a  thin  layer  of  chromium  for  wear  resistance;  the  steel  substrates  have  the 
magnetic  properties  of  AISI  1010  steel.  Magnetic  type  thickness  gages  are  often  used  to  measure  the  thickness  of  paint 
and  other  organic  coatings  on  steel,  as  well  as  zinc  (galvanized)  and  other  nonmagnetic  metallic  coatings.  They  can  also 
be  used  to  estimate  magnetic  properties  of  austenitic  stainless  steel  weld  metal.  Because  the  magnetic  properties  of  the 
weld  metal  are  closely  related  to  the  ferrite  content  of  the  weld,  these instruments  are  used  to  estimate  the  ferrite  content. 

The  thickness  values  given  for  the  coatings  are  certified  to  be  within  5%  of  the  true  thicknesses.  The  card  on  which  the 
four  plates  are  mounted  consists  of  a  steel  sheet  sandwiched  between  two  cardboard  layers.  The  steel  sheet  gives  the 
appearance  to  most  instruments  of  an  infinitely  thick  substrate,  and  removal  of  the  plates  from  the  card  may  change 
the  response  and  calibration  of  some  types  of  coating  thickness  gages. 

The  nominal  coating  thicknesses  for  this  SRM  are: 

Plate  1 
Plate  2 
Plate  3 
Plate  4 

0  um 
6  um 
20  pm 
48  pm 

(6.0 
mil  ) 
(0.24  mil  ) 
mil) 
(0.8 
mils) 
(1.9 

The  certified  coating  thicknesses  are  printed  on  the  card. 

The  coating  thicknesses  were  determined  from  measurements  made  on  instruments  which  were  calibrated  with  NBS 
master  standards. 
To  further  ensure  accuracy,  the  thickness  of  one  of  every  25  plates  is  determined  by  gravimetric 
procedures. 

CAUTION:  This  SRM  should  not  be  left  unprotected in  a  corrosive  laboratory  environment  for  an  extended  period  of 
time  as  some  corrosion  may  occur.  Corrosion  products  can  often  be  removed  with  a  non-abrasive  polishing  cream  with- 
out  affecting  the  certification. 

Stanley  D.  Rasberry,  Chief 
Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials 

September  11,  1985 
Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 
(Revision  of  Certificate 
dated  8-27-84)

  

