U.S.  Depsrimentat  Commeice 
Mealcalen  Baldrige 
Becectary? 
“ee  : 
Naicnat  Puranas 
of  Standards 
Ernest  Ymnbes,  Glsectar 
teal 

National  Bureau  of  Standards 

Certificate  of  Analysis 

Standard  Reference  Material  1514 

Thermal  Analysis  Purity  Set 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  a  set  of  four  vials  containing  “pure”  phenacetin  and  phenacetin  doped  with 
nominal  0.7,  2.  and  5  mole  percent  of  p-aminobenzoie  acid.  SRM  1514  is  intended  for  use  in  evaluating  methods  of 
determining  purity  by  differential  scanning  calorimetry. 
The  actual  amounts  of  p-aminobenzoic  acid  present  were 
determined  by  hquid  chromatography  and  confirmed  by  fluorescence  spectrometry.  The  certified  values  for  p-amino- 
benzoic  acid  in  mole  percent  are  given  below. 

Nominal  Level 

p-ABA,  mole  % 

Certified  Level 

p-ABA,  mole  % 

0.0 

0.7 

2.0 

3.0 

0.00 

0.69  +  .07 

LOE  +  12 

$.02  +  .46 

The  listed  uncertainties  are  +  two  standard  deviations  of  the  certified  values.  These  uncertainties  include  estimates  of 
variability  between  the  methods  as  well  as  heterogeneities  observed.  A  minimum  3  mg  size  sample  foreach  measurement 
is  recommended  for  the  certified  values  10  be  valid. 

The  measurements  were  performed  in 
J.M.  Brown-Thomas  and  L.  Watts. 

the  NBS  Organic  Analytical  Research  Division  by  D.K.  Hancock, 

The  technical  direction  of  the  measurements  was  provided  by  W.E.  May  and  D.J.  Reeder,  Organic  Analytical  Research 
Division, 

Statistical  analysis  of  the  data  was  performed  by  R.C.  Paule,  NBS  National  Measurement  Laboratory. 
The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  Standard  Reference 
Material  were  coordinated  through  the  Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials  by  L.J.  Kieffer. 

July  23,  1984 
Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 

Stanley  D.  Rasberry,  Chief 
Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials 

(over)

The  materials  for  SRM  1514  were  prepared  by  Hoffman-LaRoche  and  donated  to  the  National  Bureau  of  Standards. 
ASTM  Committee  E-37  on  thermal  measurements  requested  that  NBS  certily  these  materials. 
Information  regarding  the  purity  of  the  undoped  phenacetin  was  obtained  from  ASTM  Coramittee  37.02.01,  as  well  as 
results  of  differential  thermal  analysis  of  this  material.  Any  impurity  in  the  form  of  a  solid  solution  cannot  be  observed 
by  the  differential  thermal  analysis,  The  undoped  phenacetin  appeared  to  be  99.9  mole  percent  pure  by thermal  analysis. 
However,  liquid  chromatography  by  both  NBS  and  ASTM  showed  the  undoped  phenacetin  impurities  to  be  between 
0.3  and  0.6  percent.  Thus  the  thermal  analysis  results  indicate  that  these  impurities,  which  are  not  p-ABA,  are  pre 
dominantly  in  solid  solution  form.  The  NBS  homogeneity  studies  using  liquid  chromatography  also  suggest  that  these 
impurities  are  evenly  dispersed  throughout  the  sample.  These  impurities  should  not  greatly  interfere  with  the  intended 
use  of  this  SRM,  The  non-solid  solution  imputities,  over  and  above  the  p-ABA,  appear  to  be  about  0.1  mole  percent. 
The  following  purity  values  are  provided  for  information  only;  they  are  nor  certified.  By  combining  the  p-ABA  and  the 
non-solid  solution  impurity  results,  the  phenacetin  “purity  levels”  for  differential  thermal  analysis  are  estimated  to  be: 

Nominal  Level 
p-ABA,  mole  % 

6.0 
0.7 

2.0 
5.0 

Purity,  mole  % 

99.9  +  0.2 
9.2  +  0.2 

98.0  +  0.2 
94.9  +  0.5

  

