Nattonal  Institute  of  Standards  &  Terhnology 
Certificate  of  Analysis 
Standard  Reference  Material  154b 

Titanium  Dioxide 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  in  the  form  of  fine  powder,  certified  primarily  for  application  in 
the  paint  and  ceramic  industries. 

Constituent 

Percent  by  Weight® 

Titanium  Dioxide  (TiO,) 

99,74> 

“Based  on  material  dried  at  110°C  for  two  hours. 

Uncertainty® 

0.05 

€  value  given  in  this  certificate  is  based  on  the  following  analytical  data: 

“The  uncertainty  figure  represents  the  95%  confidence  interval  of  the  mean  of  all  accepted  values. 

Method 

Controlled-potential  coulometric 
(0.2  g  samples) 

Volumetric  (0.35  g  samples) 

Volumetric  (Analyst  A)‘ 
Volumetric  (ASTM  D1394) 

lor  single  determinations. 

©  discrepant  results  were  omitted. 

NIST 

Average 

99.73 

99.71 

99.75 
99.78 

Cooperators® 

Standard 
Deviation! 

Number  of 
Determinations 

0.05 

0.03 

0.04 
0.05 

10? 

9 

3 
3 

Results  from  one  cooperating  laboratory  were  deemed  significantly  high  and  have  been  omitted. 

Results  from  Analyst  B  at  the  same  laboratory  were  deemed  significantly  low  and  have  been  omitted. 

This  Certificate  of Analysis  has  undergone  editorial  revision  to  reflect program  and  organizational  changes  at  NIST 
and  at  the  Department  of  Commerce.  No  attempt  was  made  to  reevaluate  the  certificate  value  or  any  technical 
data  presented  in  this  certificate. 

Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 
September  11,  1991 
(Revision  of  Certificate  dated  5-16-73) 

(over)

William  P.  Reed,  Chief 

Standard  Reference 
Materials  Program 

  

“UGGESTED  METHOD  FOR  THE  DETERMINATION  OF  SILICON  IN  FERROSILICON  ALLOYS 
Fusion  of  ferrosilicon  alloys  in  platinum  with  sodium  carbonate  and  nitre  though  an  excellent  method 
ior  refined  analysis  is  not  as  satisfactory  for  general 
purposes  as  is  fusion  with  sodium  peroxide  in  a  pure  iron 
crucible.  Such  a  fusion,  followed  by  dehydration  with  hydrochloric  acid,  is  more  convenient  and  gives  accurate 
results  if  carefully  made, 

i 

particles  by  scraping 
Heat  the  crucible  and 

Procedure.—1,  Transfer  0.5000  g  (use  0.4000  g  for  90  per  cent  silicon)  of  the  finely  powdered  sample 
(150  mesh)  to  a  50  cc  pure  iron  crucible  made  from  No,  20  gauge  (0.032-inch  thickness)  ingot  iron,  add  ap- 
proximately  13  g  of  sodium  peroxide,  mix  thoroughly  with  a 
platinum  or  iron  rod  and  carefully  clean  the  rod 
of  adhering 
with  another  rod. 
Cover  the  mixture  with  a  layer  of  about  2  g¢  additional 
peroxide. 
contents  on  a  hot  plate  for  5  to  10  minutes  to  expel  any  water  in  the  per- 
oxide  which  would  cause  splattering  in  the  subsequent  fusion, 
Carefully  fuse  over  a  low  flame  by  holding 
the 
crucible  with  a  pair  of  tongs  and  slowly  revolving  it  around  the  outer  edge  of  the  flame  until  the  contents 
have 
melted  down  quietly. 
When  the  fusion  is  molten,  rotate  the  crucible  carefully  to  stir  up  any  unattacked  par- 
ticles  on  the  bottom  or  sides,  the  crucible  and  contents  being  maintained  at  a  low  red  heat.  \  Just  before  com- 
pletion  of  the  fusion,  which  requires  only  three  or  four  minutes,  increase  the  temperature  to  bright  redness  for 
a  minute. 
If  the  reaction  has  proceeded  too  violently,  due  to  too  rapid  heating,  use  of  insufficient  sodium 
peroxide,  or  to  lack  of  thorough  mixing,  appreciable  loss  will  occur  and  the  work  should  be  repeated. 

2.  Cover  the  crucible  and  allow  it  to  cool  until  the  fusion  has  solidified,  and  tap  the  bottom  of  the  crucible, 
When  the 
while  still  warm,  several  times  on  an  iron  plate,  which  will  loosen  the  fused  mass  in  a  solid  cake. 
cooled,  transfer  the  cake  to  a  large  (275  cc)  gold  or  preferably  platinum 
crucible  and  cake  have  completely 
When  the  reaction  ceases 
glass  and  cautiously 
Cover  the  dish  with  a  clock 
dish. 
wash  the  small  amount  of  adhering  matter  in  the  crucible  into  the  dish  with  a  little  water. 
Cool  the  solution 
Evaporate  to  dryness,  preferably  on  a  steam  bath,  but  do 
and  carefully  add  an  excess  of  hydrochloric  acid. 
not  bake  at  a  temperature  above  110°C. 
If  platinum  or  gold  dishes  are  not  available  for  solution  of  the  fused 
cake,  the  latter  can  be  disintegrated  with  water  in  a  pure  nickel  dish  and  the  contents  then  transferred  to  a 
It  is  not  desirable  to  dis- 
porcelain  dish  containing  sufficient  hydrochloric  acid  to  provide  an  excess  of  acid. 
solve  the  fusions  directly  in  porcelain  because  of  the  action  of  the  alkaline  solution  on  the  porcelain. 

add  50  cc  of cold  water. 

3.  When  the  residue  is  dry,  allow  the  dish  to  cool,  add  10  ce  of  hydrochloric  acid  (sp.  gr.  1.13),  cover 
Dilute  with  100  ce  of  hot  water,  digest  for  a  few  minutes,  and 
Wash  about  eight  times  with  hot  5  per  cent  hydrochloric  acid,  twice  with 

the  dish,  and  heat  gently  for  a  few  minutes. 
‘Iter  through  an  11  cm  paper. 
arm  5  per  cent  sulphuric  acid  and  then  a  few  times  with  hot  water. 

Reserve  paper  and  residue. 

4.  Evaporate  the  filtrate  to  dryness  and  bake  the  covered  casserole  or  dish  at  110°  C.  for  one  hour. 

Heat- 
ing  at  a  higher  temperature  is  unnecessary  and  also  disadvantageous. 
Cool,  add  10  ce  of  hydrochloric  acid 
(1-1),  digest  on  the  steam  bath  for  10  minutes,  add  100  cc  of  warm  water,  filter  immediately,  and  wash  abéut 
eight  times  with  cold  1  per  cent  hydrochloric  acid,  once  with  cold  5  per  cent  sulphuric  acid  and  then  a  few  times 
with 

water. 

cold 

paper  without  inflaming. 

5.  Place  the  paper  and  silica  from  the  second  dehydration  in  a  large  partially  covered 
Add  the  paper  containing  the  silica  from  the  first 

and  char  the 
as  before,  and. then  ignite  carefully  until  the  carbon  has  been  burned  off. 
igniting  the  papers,  as  the  current  of  air  produced  by  a  burning  filter  is  sufficient  to  carry 
out  of  the  crucible. 
tightly  covered  crucible  to  the  full  heat  of  a  blast  lamp  and  continue  the 
minutes. 
the  above  temperature. 
pure  hydrofluoric  acid  (48  per  cent). 
which  contains  46.76  per  cent  silicon. 
be  carried  through  all  stages  of  the  operation. 

platinum  crucible 
dehydration,  char 
Great  care  should  be  exercised  in 
divided  silica 
finely 
When  the  carbon  of  the  filter  paper  has  been  completely  burned,  gradually  heat  the 
heating  at  1,050  to  1,110°  C.  for  25 
for  10  minutes  at 
Add  sufficient  sulphuric  acid  (1-1)  to  moisten  the  silica  and  then  15  to  20  cc  of 
The  loss  represents  silica 
Evaporate  to  dryness,  ignite,  and  weigh. 
A  blank,  not  omitting  the  same  amount  of  hydrofluoric  acid,  should 

Cool  in  a  desiccator,  weigh,  and  check  for  constant  weight  by  additional  heating 

The  silica  remaining  in  the  filtrate  after  the  second  dehydration  is  practically  negligible,  averaging  about 
0.0006  to  0.0010  g  after  dehydrations  with  hydrochloric  acid  and  0.0010  to  0.0015  g  after  dehydrations  with 
sulphuric  acid.

