NUST

Date of Issue: 
26 July 2019 
 

 
Standard Reference Material 1565 
Mycotoxins in Corn 
CERTIFICATE OF ANALYSIS 

 

Purpose:  This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended for validation of methods for determining mycotoxins 
in corn and similar materials. 
 
Description:  A unit of SRM 1565 consists of one bottle each of two materials: low level or blank corn and incurred 
corn with native levels of mycotoxins.  Each bottle contains approximately 60 g of ground corn. 
 
Certified Value:  A certified value is provided in Table 1.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the 
highest  confidence  in  its  accuracy  in  that  all  known  or  suspected  sources  of  bias  have  been  fully  investigated  or 
accounted for by NIST. 
 
A certified mass fraction value for ochratoxin A in SRM 1565, reported on an as-received basis, is provided in Table 1.  
This  value  was  assigned  based  upon  measurements  made  at  NIST  and  the  United  States  Food  and  Drug 
Administration (FDA) using established methods [1–3] and includes data from collaborating laboratories participating 
in a NIST-conducted interlaboratory study [4].  This value is traceable to the SI measurement unit for chemical mass 
fraction, expressed as nanograms per gram. 
 

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fraction Value for Ochratoxin A in SRM 1565 Mycotoxins in Corn (Incurred)(a) 

 

Measurand 

Mass Fraction 
(ng/g) 

Ochratoxin A 

 

9.4  ±  1.2 

(a)  Certified values are expressed as x ± U95(x), where x is the value and U95(x) is the expanded uncertainty of the value.  The 
true value of the measurand lies within the interval x ± U95(x) with 95 % confidence.  A certified value can be regarded as a 
normally distributed random variable with mean x and standard deviation U95%(x)/2 [5]. 

 
 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 1565 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until  01 August 2024,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this 
certificate (see “Instructions for Storage and Use”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, 
or otherwise modified. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division  
 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

 

SRM 1565 

Page 1 of 6 

 

 
 

Non-Certified Values:  Non-certified values are listed in Tables 2 and 3 for additional mycotoxins in SRM 1565.  
These non-certified values are the best current estimates based on available data but they do not meet the NIST criteria 
for certification.  The associated uncertainties may not include all sources of bias and variability.  These values were 
derived  from  results  reported  by  NIST  and/or  FDA  using  established  methods  [1–3]  and  include  data  from 
collaborating laboratories participating in a NIST-conducted interlaboratory study [4].  These values are traceable to 
the measurement processes and standards used by NIST, FDA, and the study participants. 
 

a)
Table 2.  Non-Certified Mass Fraction Values for Mycotoxins in SRM 1565 (Blank)(a) 

Measurand 

Deoxynivalenol(b,c,d) 

4C,d) 

Fumonisin B1

(c,d) 

Mass Fraction 
(ng/g) 
g) 

 

 

142 

±  36 

10.4  ±  3.9 

(a)  Assigned values are expressed as x ± U95(x), where x is the value and U95(x) is the expanded uncertainty of the value.  The 
best estimated value of the measurand lies within the interval x ± U95(x) with 95 % confidence.  The assigned value can be 
regarded as a normally distributed random variable with mean x and standard deviation U95%(x)/2 [5]. 

X 

x 

(b)  NIST ID-LC-MS/MS 
(c)  FDA ID-LC-MS/MS 
(d)  Collaborating laboratories reporting methods as described in Appendix B. 
 
 

Table 3.  Non-Certified Mass Fraction Values for Mycotoxins in SRM 1565 (Incurred)(a) 

Mass Fraction 
(ng/g) 
g) 

7.5  ± 

1.7 

1.43  ± 

0.34 

0.98  ± 

0.19 

0.87  ± 

0.24 

10.2  ± 

2.9 

467 

805 

217 

±  67 

±  190 

±  30 

99.3  ± 

8.4 

1150 

±  169 

38.2  ± 

6.0 

18.4  ± 

4.2 

61 

±  36 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Measurand 

Aflatoxin B1

(b,c,d) 
1) 

Aflatoxin B2

(b,c,d) 
1) 

Aflatoxin G1

(b,c,d) 
1) 

Aflatoxin G2

(b,d) 

Total Aflatoxins(b,d) 
1) 

Deoxynivalenol(b,c,d) 
1) 

Fumonisin B1

(c,d) 

Fumonisin B2

(c,d) 

Fumonisin B3

(c,d) 

Total Fumonisins(c,d) 
1) 

HT-2 Toxin(c,d) 
1) 

T-2 Toxin(c,d) 
1) 

Zearalenone(b,c,d) 
1) 

 

(a)  Assigned values are expressed as x ± U95(x), where x is the value and U95(x) is the expanded uncertainty of the value.  The 
best estimated value of the measurand lies within the interval x ± U95(x) with 95 % confidence.  The assigned value can be 
regarded as a normally distributed random variable with mean x and standard deviation U95%(x)/2 [5]. 

(b)  NIST ID-LC-MS/MS 
(c)  FDA ID-LC-MS/MS 
(d)  Collaborating laboratories reporting methods as described in Appendix B. 

SRM 1565 

 

Page 2 of 6 

 

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION 

  

)

%

(
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
D
 
e
m
u
l
o
V

8

6

4

2

0

    
  

NN 

1

10

100

1000

n) 
Size Class (μm)

 
 
 
Figure 1.  The mean particle sizes of the blank and incurred 
corns  were  evaluated  using  a  Malvern  Mastersizer  3000 
(Westborough, MA).  Corn samples (approximately 0.5 g) 
were  dispersed  in  ethanol  and  all  measurements  were 
background  corrected.    The  average  particle  size  for 
SRM 1565  (Blank)  (solid  line)  was  determined  to  be 
588 µm with a standard deviation of 17 µm (n = 10).  For 
SRM 1565  (Incurred)  (dashed  line),  the  average  particle 
size was determined to be 676 µm with a standard deviation 
of 92 µm (n = 10). 
 
 
 
 

ts  of 

bottles 

 
 
Storage  and  Handling:    The  original  unopened  bottles  of  SRM 1565  should  be  stored  at  room  temperature 
room  temperature
(20 °C ± 5 °C).  An open bottle can be reused until the material reaches its expiration date, provided that the open 
bottle is resealed and stored at room temperature (20 °C ± 5 °C). 
 
Use:    Before  use,  the  contents  of  the  unopened  bottle  should  be  mixed  thoroughly  by  inverting  and/or  rolling.  
Homogeneity of the material has not been evaluated for sample sizes smaller than those used by NIST or FDA methods 
described below.  Therefore, the certified and non-certified values may not be valid for test portions smaller than those 
described  in  the  subsequent  sections:    1 g  for  determination  of  fumonisin B1,  fumonisin B2,  fumonisin B3, 
deoxynivalenol,  zearalenone,  T-2 toxin,  and  HT-2 toxin,  and  5 g  for  determination  of  aflatoxin B1,  aflatoxin B2, 
aflatoxin G1, aflatoxin G2, total aflatoxins, and ochratoxin A.  Results obtained should include their own estimates of 
uncertainty and can be compared to the certified values using procedures described in reference 6. 
 
Safety:  SRM 1565 is intended for research use; not for human consumption. 
 
Source and Preparation:  The SRM is a blend of ground corns.  Approximately 70 kg of blank whole kernels of 
corn were collected from various markets in Maryland.  Approximately 14 kg of homogenized ground contaminated 
corn were collected from FDA Office of Regulatory Science, Center for Food Science and Nutrition (CFSAN), US 
Department of Agriculture Federal Grain Inspection Service (USDA FGIS, Kansas City, MO), and from Trilogy Labs 
(Washington, MO).  All materials were transferred directly from the FDA/CFSAN (College Park, MD) to the NIST 
Cryogenic Reference Material Production Facility (CRMPF, Charleston, SC).  Whole kernels were cryohomogenized 
twice in a Palla STC Vibrating Cryomill (KHD Humboldt Wedag, Cologne, Germany) maintained at –180 °C for the 
duration of the process [7].  The contaminated corn (14 kg) was mixed with 28 kg of homogenized blank corn using 
a  rotating  blender  then  packaged  in  60  g  aliquots  into  amber  bottles.    The  particle  size  distributions  of  the  final 
packaged units of SRM 1565 were evaluated and are described in Figure 1.  The remaining blank corn was mixed and 
packaged in 60 g aliquots into amber bottles.  The final packaged units of SRM 1565 were irradiated to an absorbed 
dose of 11.9 kGy to 18.7 kGy by Neutron Products (Dickerson, MD). 
 
Analytical Approach for Determination of Mycotoxins:  Value assignment of the mass fractions of mycotoxins in 
SRM 1565  was  based  on  the  combination  of  measurements  made  by  NIST  using  isotope  dilution  liquid 
chromatography  with  tandem  mass  spectrometry (ID-LC-MS/MS),  by  FDA  using  ID-LC-MS/MS,  and  by 
collaborating  laboratories,  where  available.    Methods  reported  by  collaborating  laboratories  are  described  in 
Appendix B. 
 
NIST  Analyses  for  Aflatoxin  B1,  Aflatoxin  B2,  Aflatoxin  G1,  Aflatoxin  G2,  Total  Aflatoxins,  Deoxynivalenol, 
Ochratoxin A, and Zearalenone Using ID-LC-MS/MS [1]:  Mass fractions of aflatoxin B1, aflatoxin B2, aflatoxin G1, 
aflatoxin G2, total aflatoxins, and ochratoxin A were measured by ID-LC-MS/MS in duplicate 5.0 g test portions taken 
from  each  of  10 bottles  of  SRM 1565  using  the  internal  standards  listed  in  reference  2.    Mass  fractions  of 
deoxynivalenol and zearalenone were measured by ID-LC-MS/MS in duplicate 1.0 g test portions taken from each of 
10 bottles of SRM 1565 using the internal standards listed in reference 2.  Each sample was hydrated with a volume 
of water and mycotoxins were extracted into 50:50 (volume fraction) water:acetonitrile using a large capacity mixer.  
Samples  were  centrifuged  and  filtered,  and  an  aliquot  of  the  supernatant  was  analyzed  by  positive-ion  mode 
ID-LC-MS/MS.  A gradient method with an ammonium formate buffer/methanol mobile phase and a C18 column 

SRM 1565 

 

Page 3 of 6 

 

were used for ID-LC-MS/MS determination of the mycotoxins.  Calibrants were prepared gravimetrically, at levels 
intended to approximate the levels of the mycotoxins in the SRM following extraction.  The same internal standard 
solutions  containing  stable  isotope  labeled  mycotoxins  were  used  for  spiking  the  calibrants  and  samples.    The 
calibration  solutions  used  for  value  assignment  of  aflatoxin  B1,  aflatoxin  B2,  aflatoxin  G1,  aflatoxin  G2, 
deoxynivalenol,  and  zearalenone  were  prepared  using  Certified  Reference  Materials  (CRMs)  from  the  European 
Commission Joint Research Centre (EC-JRC, Geel, Belgium).  The calibration solutions used for value assignment of 
ochratoxin A were prepared using a CRM from the National Research Council Canada (NRCC, Ottawa, ON).  The 
analyte and internal standard transitions monitored for ID-LC-MS/MS are listed in reference 3. 
 
FDA  Analyses  for  Aflatoxin  B1,  Aflatoxin  B2,  Aflatoxin  G1,  Deoxynivalenol,  Fumonisin  B1,  Fumonisin  B2, 
Fumonisin B3, Total Fumonisins, T-2 Toxin, HT-2 Toxin, and Zearalenone Using ID-LC-MS/MS [2]:  Mass fractions 
of aflatoxin B1, aflatoxin B2, and aflatoxin G1 were measured by ID-LC-MS/MS in duplicate 5.0 g test portions taken 
from  each  of  10 bottles  of  SRM 1565  using  the  internal  standards  listed  in  reference  2.    Mass  fractions  of 
deoxynivalenol, fumonisin B1, fumonisin B2, fumonisin B3, total fumonisins, T-2 toxin, HT-2 toxin, and zearalenone 
were measured by ID-LC-MS/MS in duplicate 1.0 g test portions taken from each of 10 bottles of SRM 1565 using 
the internal standards listed in reference 2.  Each sample was extracted into 50:50 (volume fraction) water:acetonitrile 
using a large capacity mixer.  Samples were centrifuged and filtered, and an aliquot of the supernatant was analyzed 
by positive-ion mode ID-LC-MS/MS.  A gradient method with an ammonium formate buffer/methanol mobile phase 
and a C18 column were used for ID-LC-MS/MS determination of the mycotoxins.  The analyte and internal standard 
transitions monitored for ID-LC-MS/MS are listed in reference 3. 
 
Collaborating Laboratories’ Analyses:  Collaborating laboratories were asked to use their usual methods to make 
measurements  on  three  test  portions  taken  from  one  bottle  each  of  SRM 1565  Mycotoxins  in  Corn (Blank)  and 
SRM 1565  Mycotoxins  in  Corn (Incurred).    Methods  reported  by  collaborating  laboratories  are  described  in 
Appendix B. 
 
Homogeneity Assessment:  The homogeneity of mycotoxins in the SRM was assessed at NIST and FDA using the 
methods  and  test  portion  sizes  described  in  this  certificate  (see  “Instructions  for  Storage  and  Use”).    Analysis  of 
variance at a 5 % significance did not show statistically significant heterogeneity. 
 
Coordination of the technical measurements leading to the certification of this SRM was performed by M.M. Phillips 
of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division.  Analytical measurements at NIST were performed by T.M. López Seal and 
J.M. Ness of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division.  Analytical measurements at FDA were performed by K. Zhang 
of the FDA/CFSAN.  Analysts at many collaborating laboratories (Appendix A) analyzed SRM 1565 as part of an 
exercise  of  the  NIST  Health  Assessment  Measurements  Quality  Assurance  Program  (HAMQAP).    Preparation, 
blending, and packaging of the SRM was conducted by A.J. Moors, J.M. Ness, J. Trevillian, and D.L. Ellisor of the 
NIST Chemical Sciences Division.  Statistical analysis was provided by H.K. Liu of the NIST Statistical Engineering 
Division.    Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of 
Reference Materials. 
 
 

 

SRM 1565 

 

Page 4 of 6 

 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Phillips, M.M.;  López  Seal, T.M.;  Ness, J.M.;  Zhang, K.;  Development  and  Characterization  of  a  Multi-
Mycotoxin  Reference  Material;  J.  AOAC  Int.  (2019)  available  at  https://doi.org/10.5740/jaoacint.19-0109 
(accessed July 2019). 

[2]  Zhang, K.;  Schaab, M.R.;  Southwood, G.;  Tor, E.R.;  Aston, L.S.;  Song, W.;  Eitzer, B.;  Majumdar, S.; 
Lapainis, T.;  Mai, H.;  Tran, K.;  El-Demerdash, A.;  Vega, V.;  Cai, Y.;  Wong, J.W.;  Krynitsky, A.J.; 
Begley, T.H.; A Collaborative Study: Determination of Mycotoxins in Corn, Peanut Butter, and Wheat Flour 
Using  Stable  Isotope  Dilution  Assay  (SIDA)  and  Liquid  Chromatography−Tandem  Mass  Spectrometry 
(LC-MS/MS); J. Agric. Food Chem., Vol. 65, pp. 7138–7152 (2017). 

[3]  Zhang, K.; Wong, J.W.; Krynitsky, A.J.; Trucksess, M.W.; Determining mycotoxins in baby foods and animal 
feeds using stable isotope dilution and liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry; J. Agric. Food Chem., 
Vol. 62, pp. 8935−8943 (2014). 

[4]  Barber, C.A.;  Benner,  Jr., B.A.;  Thomas, J.B.;  Burdette, C.Q.;  Camara, J.;  Long, S.E.;  Murray, J.A.; 
Phillips, M.M.;  Place, B.J.;  Rimmer, C.A.;  Wood, L.J.;  Yu, L.L.;  Chinthalapati, S.K.R.;  Tai, S.S.-C.;  NIST 
Health  Assessment  Measurements  Quality  Assurance  Program:  Exercise  1  Final  Report,  NIST  Interagency 
Report  8237,  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology,  Gaithersburg, MD  (2019);  available  at 
https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8237 (accessed July 2019). 
JCGM 101:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Supplement 1 to the Guide to Expression of Uncertainty 
in  Measurement-Propagation  of  Distributions  Using  a  Monte  Carlo  Method;  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in 
Metrology;  International  Bureau  of  Weights  and  Measures (BIPM),  Sèvres, France  (2008);  available  at 
https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_101_2008_E.pdf (accessed July 2019). 

[5] 

[6]  Sharpless, K.E.; Lippa, K.A.; Duewer, D.L.; Rukhin, A.L. The ABCs of Using Standard Reference Materials in 
the Analysis of Foods and Dietary Supplements: A Practical Guide; NIST Special Publication 260-181; National 
Institute 
at 
https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.260-181 (accessed July 2019). 

Gaithersburg, MD 

Technology, 

Standards 

available 

(2014); 

and 

of 

[7]  Moors, A.J.; Pugh, R.S.; Evans, J.R.; Ness, J.M.; Ellisor, D.L.; Bachman, M.J.; Standard Operation Procedures 
‘ion  Procedures 
(SOPs) for the Palla VM-KT Vibrating Cryomill: Production of Fresh Frozen Standard Reference and Control 
Materials (SRMs/CMs) at the NIST Reference Material Production Facility; NIST Special Publication 1196; 
at 
of  Standards 
National 
https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1196 (accessed July 2019). 

and  Technology,  Gaithersburg, MD 

available 

Institute 

(2016); 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments,  or  materials  may  be  identified  in  this  Certificate  of  Analysis  to 
to
adequately specify the experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement 
by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified 
are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
 
NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  until  its  certification  expires.    If  substantive  technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the 
certified values before this certificate expires, NIST will notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or 
register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Users of this SRM should ensure that the Certificate of Analysis in their possession is current.  Contact the Office of 
Reference Materials 100 Bureau Drive, Stop 2300, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899-2300; telephone (301) 975-2200; 
fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

may  be 

 

SRM 1565 

 

Page 5 of 6 

APPENDIX A 

 
Collaborating Laboratories Contributing Data to Value Assignment of SRM 1565: 
 
Academy of State Administration of Grain, China (Beijing, China) 
Canadian Food Inspection Agency (Ottawa, ON, Canada) 
Center for Analytical Chemistry, Department IFA-Tulln, BOKU Vienna (Tulln, Austria) 
Dyad Labs (Salt Lake City, UT) 
First Source Laboratory Solutions LLP (Hyderabad, TELANGANA, India) 
HVL, LLC (Pittsburgh, PA) 
International  Food  Safety  Training  Laboratory,  Joint  Institute  for  Food  Safety  and  Applied  Nutrition  (JIFSAN) 

(College Park, MD) 

ISURA (Burnaby, BC, Canada) 
Laboratorio de Referencia de Alimentos y Aguas, Instituto Conmemorativo Gorgas (Panamá) 
LACQSA/Lanagro-MG (Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil) 
National  Institute  for  Quality  Control  in  Health,  Oswaldo  Cruz  Foundation  (INCQS,  FIOCRUZ)  (Rio  de  Janeiro, 

National Institute of Industrial Technology (INTI), Toxicology and Nutrition Laboratory (San Martín, Buenos Aires, 

Brazil) 

Argentina) 

National Metrology Institute of South Africa, Organic Analysis Section (Pretoria, South Africa) 
National Referral Laboratory, ICAR-National Research Centre for Grapes (Pune, Maharashtra, India) 
Natural Remedies (Bangalore, Karnataka, India) 
Nature's Way (Green Bay, WI) 
OMIC USA Inc. (Portland, OR) 
SGS Canada Inc (Burnaby, BC, Canada) 
Silliker JR Laboratories ULC (Burnaby, BC, Canada) 
Taiwan Food and Drug Administration (Nangang, Taipei, Taiwan, Province of China) 
Technological Laboratory of Uruguay (Montevideo, Uruguay) 
US  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  Office  of  Regulatory  Affairs,  Southeast  Food  and  Feed  Laboratory  (SFFL) 

US  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  Center  for  Food  Safety  and  Applied  Nutrition,  Office  of  Regulatory  Science 

US  Department  of  Agriculture,  Federal  Grain  Inspection  Service,  Technology  and  Science  Division  (Kansas 

(Atlanta, GA) 

(College Park, MD) 

City, MO) 

Weck Laboratories, Inc. (City of Industry, CA) 
 
 

 
Methods Reported by Collaborating Laboratories 
 

Analyte(s) 

Method 

APPENDIX B 

Aflatoxins 

LC-MS/MS; LC-fluorescence; Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) 

Fumonisins 

LC-MS/MS; LC-fluorescence 

Deoxynivalenol 

LC-MS/MS; LC-absorbance; Gas chromatography with electron capture detection (GC-ECD) 

Zearalenone 

LC-MS/MS; LC-fluorescence 

Ochratoxin A 

LC-MS/MS; LC-fluorescence 

HT-2 Toxin 

LC-MS/MS 

T-2 Toxin 

LC-MS/MS; LC-absorbance 

 

 
 

SRM 1565 

 

Page 6 of 6 

