 

 

 
 
 
 

 
,
I
P

 
.

 
n
a

gent  OF  c 

 
”
8
0
2

 
.
4

‘States  oF  © 

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material 1595 

 

 
Tripalmitin 

 
wr  use 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is certified as a chemical of known purity.  It is intended primarily for use 
or  the 
in the calibration and standardization of procedures for the chemical analysis of serum for triglycerides and for the 
critical evaluation of routine working or secondary reference materials used in these procedures.  A unit of SRM 1595 
consists of 2 g of material. 
 
Certified Value:  The certified tripalmitin content is given below with the associated uncertainty that is based on the 
expected upper limit for bias between the high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and nuclear  magnetic 
resonance (NMR) methods used in the certification.  
 

 
 
Reference Values:  The following weight percent values are not certified and the uncertainty provided are plus or minus 
one standard deviation of the mean.  
 

Tripalmitin 

 

 

Unknown glyceride 
Methanol 
Insoluble matter 
Residue on ignition 

Weight Percent 
(%) 

99.5  ± 

0.2 

Weight Percent 
(%) 

0.5 
± 
0.0057  ± 
0.0020  ± 
± 
0.001 

0.1 
0.0002 
0.0009 
0.0005 

 
 
Expiration  of  SRM  Certificate:    The  certification  of  SRM 1595  is  valid,  within  the  measurement  uncertainty 
d  stored  in  accordance  with  instructions 
specified, for five years from date of purchase, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with instructions 
e”).  The  certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is  damaged,
given in this certificate (see “Instructions for Storage and Use”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical changes occur that affect the certification, NIST will notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet 
or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  the  certification  of  this  SRM  was  performed  by  B. Coxon 
formerly of the NBS Organics Analytical Research Division. 
 
This Certificate of Analysis has undergone editorial revision to reflect program and organizational changes at NIST and 
at  the  Department  of  Commerce.    No  attempt  was  made  to  reevaluate  the  certificate  values  or  any  technical  data 
presented on this certificate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  12 May 2016 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Steven J. Choquette, Acting Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

NBS 

 

SRM 1595 

Page 1 of 3 

Analytical measurements were performed at NBS in the former Organics Analytical Research Division by A. Cohen, 
B. Coxon, M. Luzarraga, S. Margolis, L.T. Sniegoski, and E. White V.  Microchemical analysis were performed by 
Gaibraith Laboratories, Inc. (Knoxville, TN) and Swarzkopf Microanalytical Laboratory (Woodside, NY). 
 
Statistical analysis of the data was provided by R. Paule of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Office  of  Reference
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
SOURCE, PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
The tripalmitin was obtained from Nu-Chek-Prep, Inc. (Elysian, MN). 
 
The identity of the SRM was confirmed by proton and 13C NMR spectroscopy, by the observation of a molecular ion 
at  a  mass  to  charge  ratio  of  806  in  its  electron  impact  mass  spectrum,  and  by  melting  point  68.2 °C  to  69.0 °C 
(uncorrected). 
 
The tripalmitin content of the SRM was determined by HPLC to be 99.5 % and by proton NMR spectroscopy to be 
100.0 %.    In  each  case,  the  tripalmitin  value  was  calculated  by  subtraction  of  the  impurities  determined  by  the 
respective methods from 100 %.  For example, the tripalmitin content determined by proton NMR spectroscopy was 
obtained by subtraction of the methanol content (0.0057 %).  (The contents of insoluble matter and residue on ignition 
make negligible contributions to the calculation of tripalmitin content.)  Apart from methanol, no other impurities 
were detected by direct NMR spectroscopy of the SRM, and therefore the proton integral remaining after subtraction 
of the methanol signal from the total integral measured by NMR was used as a measure of the tripalmitin content of 
the SRM. 
 
The  HPLC  method  resolves  positional  isomers  of  mixed  triglycerides,  O-acetyl-di-O-palmitylglycerols,  and 
di-O-acetyl-O-palmitylglycerols,  and  was  used  to  assess  both  the  purity  and  homogeneity  of  the  SRM.    For  this 
purpose, ten selected samples of the SRM were analyzed by HPLC and five of these samples were selected randomly 
for duplicate determinations.  
 
HPLC of the  SRM showed a strong peak for tripalmitin with retention constant (capacity factor) k’ = 11.25 and a 
weak  impurity  peak  at  k’ = 6.33.    Retention  constant  k’ = (Elution  Volume - Void  Volume)/Void  Volume.    The 
intensity of the impurity peak was below the detection threshold of the HPLC integrator in use, and so, for the purpose 
of purity and homogeneity testing, the HPLC data was acquired and processed by means of an NMR data acquisition 
system.  The proportion of impurity was calculated as the ratio of the peak areas of the impurities to the sum of the 
peak areas of the impurities plus the tripalmitin.  The assumption was made that tripalmitin and the impurity have a 
similar absorbance at 215 nm.  This assumption is reasonable for saturated triglycerides of similar structure.  
 
The  purity  of  the  SRM  was  additional  assessed  by  thin  layer  chromatography (TLC).    Under  certain  specific 
conditions, the SRM showed an intense spot for tripalmitin at Rt 0.30 and a very faint impurity spot at Rt 0.09.  The 
mobility  of 
that  of  palmitic  acid,  palmityl  alcohol,  methyl  
to 
palmitate,  1-O-palmitriglycerol,  2-O-palmitriglycerol,  1,2-di-O-palmitriglycerol,  1,3-di-O-palmitriglycerol, 
1,3-di-O-acetyl-2-O-palmitylglycerol,  
tri-O-acetylglycerol, 
3-O-acetyl-1,2-di-O-palmitylglycerol, or 2-O-acetyl-1,3-di-O-palmitylglycerol.  
 
Proton NMR spectroscopy of an impurity fraction isolated by repeated HPLC of the SRM indicated that the impurity 
is most likely a triglyceride of similar structure.  No signals for olefinic protons were detected in the spectrum of the 
impurity concentrate thus ruling out the possibility of an unsaturated triglyceride.  
 
The integrators of the HPLC peaks for tripalmitin and the unknown glyceride indicated satisfactory homogeneity for 
the SRM.  
  
The content of insoluble matter in the SRM was determined by dissolution and filtration of three, three-unit pools of 
the SRM (~ 6 g each) in chloroform (80 mL) that had been prefiltered through a micropore filter (type FY, 0.5 µm). 
 

2,3-di-O-acetyl-1-O-palmitylglycerol, 

impurity  did  not  correspond 

the 

                                                           

(1)   Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
SRM 1595 

Page 2 of 3 

The  residue  on  ignition  was  determined  by  volatilization  of  three,  three-unit  pools  of  the  SRM  (~ 6 g  each)  from 
covered,  tared  30-mL  platinum  crucibles  followed  by  two  treatments  of  the  residues  with  100 µL  of  concentrated 
sulfuric acid and ignition of the crucibles at 800 °C ± 25 °C for 15 min. 
 
Microchemical  analysis  yielded  these  percentages:  carbon,  75.96 % ± 0.42 %;  hydrogen  12.25 % ± 0.05 %.  
Calculated percentages based on C51H98O6 are 75.87 % and 12.24 %, respectively, and the reported uncertainties are 
plus or minus one standard deviation of the mean.  
 
NOTICE AND WARNING TO USERS 
 
SRM 1595 IS INTENDED FOR RESEARCH USE. 
 
STORAGE  AND  USE 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage:  SRM 1595 should be stored in a tightly‐closed bottle at or below room temperature (–20 °C to 23 °C is 
recommended).    For  extended  periods  of  storage  after  opening,  the  material  should  be  kept  at  or  below  room 
temperature in a desiccator under inert gas.  It should be allowed to warm to room temperature before opening. 
 
Use:  A stock solution of tripalmitin may be prepared by a method similar to that used triolein [1].  Dissolve 0.100 g 
of tripalmitin in chloroform contained in a 100-mLvolumetric flask and dilute to volume with chloroform.  Tightly 
stoppered, this stock standard solution is stable for several months in the dark. 
 
A working tripalmitin standard solution should be prepared daily before use by dilution one volume of stock solution 
with nine volumes of chloroform.  A standard quantity of glycerol may be generated from the working solution by 
saponification according to an available procedure [1]. 
 
 
 
 

ume  with 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Wybenga, D.R.;  Inkpen, J.A.;  Clinical  Chemistry  Principles  and  Technics;  2nd  ed.;  Henry, R.J;  Cannon, D.C.; 

Winkelman, J.W., Eds.; Harper & Row: Hagerstown, MD, p. 1458 (1974). 

  
  12 May 2016  (Updated  storage  conditions;  editorial  changes);  06 January 2016 (Editorial  changes); 
 
date).   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certificate  Revision  History: 
06 July 1983 (Original certificate date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This  can  be 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
948- 
accomplished  by  contacting 
(301)  948-3730;  
 
e-mail mailto:srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301)  975-2200; 

telephone 

fax 

SRM 1595 

Page 3 of 3 

