ys > 

National  Institute  of  Standards  &  Technology 

Certificate 

Standard  Reference  Material  1905 

Nickel  Microhardness  Test  Block 

(Knoop) 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for 
use  in  calibrating  Knoop-type 
microhardness  testers  and  is  certified  for  an  average  Knoop  hardness  value  at  2.94N  (300  g-f).  SRM  1905 
consists  of  a  1.35-cm  square  test  block  of  electrodeposited  bright  nickel  (approximately  750  pm  thick)  on  an 
AISI  1010  steel  substrate.  The  block  is  mounted  in  thermosetting  epoxy. 

Test  Block  No.: 

Calibrated  by: 

Lot  No.: 

*Date: 

Positions  of  Indentations 

,   
A 

  

4 

3 

  

3 

  

Load-300  -f 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4, 
3. 

Average 

*The  date  is  used  for  recordation  purposes  only.  There  is  no  need  for  periodic  recertification.  The  certified 
hardness  values  are  stable  with  proper  care  and  handling  of  the  test  block. 

The  average  values  are  certified  to  be  within  +  5%  of  the  true  value. 

The  Knoop  hardness  measurement  was  made  according  to  ASTM  Test  Methods  E384  and  B578. 

Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 
March  20,  1992 
(Revision  of  certificate  dated  8-18-86) 

(over)

William  P.  Reed,  Chief 
Standard  Reference  Materials  Program 

  

Hardness  values  for  this  SRM  were  obtained  using  a  calibrated  hardness  tester.  The  optical  measuring  device 
of  the  hardness  tester  was  calibrated  with  a  certified  stage  micrometer  while  the  loading  mechanism  was 
calibrated  with  a  miniature  precision  load  cell  that  had  been  previously  calibrated  with  NIST  certified  weights. 
The  indentations  are  measured  at  a  total  magnification  of  1000  using  a  100X  dry  lens  objective  with  a 
numerical  aperature  of  0.90, 

The  microhardness  test  block  was  fabricated  and  calibrated  in  the  NIST  Materials  Science  and  Engineering 
Laboratory,  Metallurgy  Division’s  Electrodeposition  Group,  by  D.R.  Kelley,  C.E.  Johnson,  and  PN.  Sharpless. 

The  overall  direction  of  the  technical  effort  leading  to  certification  of  this  Standard  Reference  Material  was 
performed  under  the  direction  of  D.S.  Lashmore,  Metallurgy  Division:  technical  coordination  was  performed 
by  E.C.  Soltani,  Electrodeposition  Group. 

The  support  aspects  involved  in  the  original  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  Standard 
Reference  Materials  Program  by  R.W.  Seward. 
Revision  of  the  certificate  was  coordinated  through  the 
Standard  Reference  Materials  Program  by  N.M.  Trahey.

