U.  S.  Department  of  Commerce 
Malcolm-Baldrige 
Secretary’ 

oni  feet 

National  Bureau  of  Standards 

Certificate 

Standard  Reference  Material  1961 

Nominal  30-um  Diameter  Polystyrene  Spheres 

(In  Cooperation  with  the  American  Society  for  Testing  and  Materials) 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  intended  for  use  as  a  primary  particle  size  reference  standard  for  the  calibration 
of  particle  measuring  instruments  including  flow-through  counters  and  optical  and  electron  microscopes.  SRM  1961  is 
a 
suspension  of  polystyrene  spheres  in  water  at  a  weight  concentration  of  about  0.5%. 

The  number  average  particle  diameter  was  measured  in  air  using  Center  Distance  Finding  (CDF),  an  optical  technique  related 
to  array  sizing  [1].  Over  2000  particle  diameters  were  measured  with  this  technique.  The  certified  value  is: 

Number  Average  Diameter,  pm 

  

29.64 

Uncertainty,  wm 

+0.06 

The  uncertainty  consists  of  both  random  and  systematic  errors,  and  includes  sample-to-sample  variability. 

The  value  certified  for  the  number  average  diameter  was  confirmed  by  one  other  measurement  technique,  Metrology 
Electron  Microscopy  (MEM).  In  this  technique,  which  measures  the  particles  in  an  ultra-high  vacuum,  the  particles  are 
individually  scanned  through  a  stationary  electron  beam  while  the  position  of  the  scanning  stage  is  monitored  by a  stabilized 
helium-neon  laser  interferometer.  A  plot  of  secondary-electron  intensity  vs.  stage  position  gives  the  particle  diameter  [2]. 
The  result  from  MEM  is  29.68  +0.05  ym. 

The  size  distribution  of  the  polystyrene  spheres,  as  determined  by  CDF,  is  Gaussian  with  a  coefficient  of  variation  of  0.8% 
(excluding  particles  with  diameters  not  on  the  main  peak).  The  material  was  precision  sieved  with  a  33-~m  diameter-opening 
electroformed  sieve  to  remove  oversized  particles.  As  a  result,  the  number  of  oversized  outliers  from  the  main  peak  Is  less 
than  1%;  the  same  is  true  for  the  undersized  outliers.  A  sphere  is  defined  as  an  outlier  if  it’s  diameter  is  more  than  40  from 
the  number  average  diameter  of  the  main  peak.  The  material  is  expected  to  have  at  least  a  four-year  shelf  life  when  stored 
at  room  temperature,  provided  the  cap  on  the  vial  is  not  removed.  Care  should  be  exercised  to  prevent  contamination  once 
the  cap  has  been  removed.  Fifty  ng/g  of  sodium  azide  was  added  as  a  biocide  before  the  material  was  packaged. 

Before  sampling,  manually  shake  and/or  expose  the  SRM  vial  to  ultrasonics  until  the  spheres  are  uniformly  distributed,  then 
take  a  sample  by  squeezing  a  drop  from  the  vial.  Use  filtered  (0.4-~m  pore  size  filter)  distilled  water  for  dilution.  When 
electrolytes  are  used  for  electrical  sensing-zone  measurements,  first  dilute  the  sample  with  water  to  prevent  agglomeration. 

The  technology  necessary  to  produce  these  latex  particles  was  developed  by  Lehigh  University  and  the  National  Aeronautics 
and  Space  Administration  (NASA)  during  five  space  shuttle  missions  in  1982  and  1983.  The  30-ym  particles  in  SRM  1961 
were  manufactured  in  space  aboard  the  space  shuttle  Challenger  during  the  NASA  STS-11  mission.  The  particles  were 
provided  by  NASA  for  certification  by  NBS  as  a  Standard  Reference  Material  to  be  made  available  to  the  scientific  and 
technical  community. 

The  technical  direction  and  physical  measurements  leading  to  certification  were  provided  by  A.W.  Hartman,  T.  Doiron, 
G.G.  Hembree,  and  T.R.  Lettieri  of  the  Precision  Engineering  Division  of  the  National  Bureau  of  Standards. 

Manufacture  of  the  particles  was  carried  out  under  the  direction  of 
of  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration. 

J.W.  Vanderhoff  of  Lehigh  University  and  D.M.  Kornfeld 

The  overall  coordination  of  the  measurements  by  the  cooperating  laboratories  was  performed  under  the  direction  of 
R.C.  Obbink,  ASTM-NBS  Research  Associate. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  Standard  Reference  Material 
were  coordinated  through  the  NBS  Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials  by  R.L.  McKenzie. 

January  20,  1987 
Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 

. 

Stanley  D.  Rasberry,  Chief 
Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials 

(Over) 

.

[i]  A.W.  Hartman,  Powder  Technology  46,  109  (1986). 

[2]  S.  Jensen,  G.  Hembree,  J.  Marchiando,  and  D.  Swyt  in  Semiconductor  Microlithography  VI,  SPIE  Vol.  275  (SPIE, 
Bellingham,  Wash.,  1981). 

Cooperative  determinations  were  determined  in  the  following  laboratories: 

Duke  Scientific  Corp.,  Palo  Alto,  California,  $.D.  Duke  (also  performed  precision  sieving). 

Lehigh  University,  Bethlehem,  Pennsylvania, 

J.W.  Vanderhoff. 

National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration,  Huntsville,  Alabama,  D.  Kornfeld. 

Particle  Data  Systems,  Elmhurst,  Dlinois,  R.  Karuhn. 

The  following  results  are  given  for  information  only: 

Number  Average 
Diameter  (um) 

Standard  Deviation 
of 
Distribution  (zm) 

Method 

TEM 

Laboratory 

Lehigh 

Electrical- 
sensing  Zone 

_ 

Particle  Data 
Duke 

NASA 

Duke 

Optical 
microscope

31.31 

30.16 
29.61 

29.09 

29.57 

0.39 

0.78 
0.26 

0.37 

--- 

