Staves  of ©

National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Certificate 
Standard Reference Material 2074 

 

 

 
Sinusoidal Roughness Specimen 
 
Serial No.:  Sample 

 
Standard Reference Material (SRM) 2074 is a sinusoidal profile roughness specimen certified for roughness average 
Ra,  and  surface  spatial  wavelength  D.    The  SRM  is  intended  for  use  as  a  standard  for  the  calibration  of  stylus 
instruments  that  are  used  to  measure  surface  roughness.    SRM 2074  is  a  steel  block  of  nominal  Knoop 
hardness (HK) 500  which  has  been  coated  by  the  electroless  nickel  deposition  process.    A  sinusoidal  roughness 
profile was machined onto the top surface of the specimen in a facing operation by a single-point diamond tool on a 
numerically controlled lathe. 

The certified Ra and D values and their associated expanded uncertainties for this specimen are: 

 
 

 
 
 

Roughness Average (Ra), µm 
 

Surface Wavelength (D), µm 

Sample  0.013 
(individually certified) 

 

39.998  

+  0.048 
–  0.013 

This SRM was originally calibrated and certified in May 1992, when the NIST uncertainty policy used a coverage 
factor  of  k = 3  for  reporting  NIST  measurement  uncertainties,  and  was  recertified  on  November 24, 2009.    From 
1993 to 2008, this calibration result has been continually monitored by routinely measuring a NIST check-standard, 
SRM 2073-1104, 89 times.  The NIST check-standard, SRM 2073-1104, is a sinusoidal profile roughness specimen 
with nominal values of Ra = 3 µm and D = 100 µm, which was made from the same material and manufactured by 
the  same  manufacturing  process  as  the  SRM 2074  sinusoidal  profile  roughness  specimens.    A  dynamic  control 
chart [1] with both dynamic and fixed control limits is used for monitoring the long-term variation from the certified 
Ra  values  for  the  SRM  specimens.    The  check  measurement  results  have  demonstrated  high  measurement 
reproducibility within the uncertainty range, and do not reveal any significant variations or drift. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2074 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until  30 June 2024,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  in  accordance  with  instructions  given  in  this  certificate 
(see “Instructions  for  Handling,  Storage  and  Use”).    The  certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is  damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified. 

Maintenance  of  SRM  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If 
substantive  technical  changes  occur  that affect  the  certification before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST will 
notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 

The  technical  direction  and  physical  measurements  leading  to  certification  were  provided  by  T.V. Vorburger, 
J.F. Song, C.F. Vezzetti, J.E. Potzick, T.B. Renegar, and A. Zheng of the NIST Precision Engineering  Division. 

Statistical analysis was provided by J.H. Yen of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
 
 

Gaithersburg, MD  20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  26 February 2013 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

SRM 2074 
 

David G. Seiler, Chief 
Semiconductor and Dimensional Metrology Division 
 
Robert L. Watters, Jr., Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Page 1 of 5 

Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage:    SRM 2074  should  be  stored  in  its  original  wooden  box  in  a  clean  dry  environment  at  temperatures 
between 10 C and 30 C. 
 
Handling and Use:  Please note that every measurement included in the results for D was an average taken over at 
least 100 spatial periods.  Therefore, users should include at least 100 periods in any calibrations they perform using 
the spatial wavelength D.  For certification measurements, the stylus force was approximately 4 × 10–4 N.  This force 
should cause negligible damage to the hard metal surface; however, faint stylus traces may be visible on the surface. 
Repeated use with stylus instruments can slowly degrade roughness specimens; however, the specimen is expected 
to maintain its calibration values provided these measurements are taken on clear, undamaged areas. 
 
Source and  Preparation1:    The  SRM 2074  specimens  were  machined by  Pneumo  Precision, Inc.  of  Keene, New 
Hampshire  using  a  single-point  diamond  tool  in  a  facing  operation  with  a  numerically  controlled  tool  path.    The 
surface profile is highly sinusoidal as shown in Figure 1. 
 
 

Figure 1:  Representative Surface Profile Trace of SRM 2074.  The dimensions are approximate. 

 

 

NIST Certification Procedure:  The roughness average, Ra, is the average absolute deviation of the surface peaks 
and valleys about the mean line, and is defined in the ASME B46.1-2009 standard entitled “Surface Texture” [2].  
The surface wavelength, D, is the average period of the sinusoidal surface profile.  This quantity is also equal to the 
mean  spacing  of  profile  irregularities,  RSm,  as  described  in  ASME B46.1-2009 [2]  and  ISO 4287:1997(E/F) [3].  
The procedure to calculate D here is slightly different from standard procedures to calculate RSm, but the result for a 
highly sinusoidal profile is robust against such differences. 

The  parameters  Ra  and  D  were  calculated  from  surface  roughness  profiles  of  the  SRM  measured  with  a  stylus 
instrument  using  procedures  in  ASME B46.1-2009 [2].    The  sampling  rate  was  1 point  per  micrometer  over  the 
evaluation length of 4.0 mm.  The stylus had a tip radius of 5 µm  1 µm as profiled by the razor blade method [4], 
and calculated in accordance with ASME B46.1-2009 [2].  The high-pass 2RC filter [2] cutoff length was 0.76 mm; 
however, the quoted Ra value also applies to calibrations of instruments using Gaussian filters with 0.8 mm cutoff 
because the 40 μm spatial wavelength is much smaller than the 0.8 mm cutoff. 

                                                           
1 Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this certificate in order to specify adequately the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the 
purpose. 

Page 2 of 5 

SRM 2074 
 

The  stylus  instrument  was  interfaced  to  a  laboratory  computer  and  a  HeNe  laser  interferometer,  and  its  vertical 
motion was calibrated using an interferometrically measured step height standard.  The instrument was operated in 
the skidless mode with an external reference datum. 

The  results  for  Ra  and  D  are  based  on  profile  traces  in  pairs  at  each  of  nine  evenly  distributed  positions  on  the 
specimen  surface  as  shown  in  Figure 2.    The  certification  of  both  parameters  is  valid  for  any  unflawed  positions 
within the area defined by the extremes of the profile traces shown in Figure 2.  However, both the Ra and D values 
are observed to vary systematically over the surface when data from all the specimens are examined collectively. 
 

C 

3.5 

4

3

Ra

Ra

6

5

Ra

Ra

Ra,D

D

Ra,D 

Serial Number 

 

 
Figure 2: Measurements positions for SRM 2074.  The positions of traces are shown in mm with respect to the 
upper left corner C of the roughness area. 

 
 
Calibration Uncertainty:  The Ra values on the left side differ systematically by 0.005 µm from those on the right 
side.  Therefore, the quoted value for Ra is an average of the six positions indicated as “Ra” in Figure 2 rather than 
nine.  The expanded calibration uncertainty U for both Ra and D is the combined standard uncertainty uc multiplied 
by a coverage factor k = 2 [5,6].  The combined standard uncertainty uc is the quadratic sum of the system standard 
uncertainty u(I) and the statistical variation of the measurements s.  The statistical variation of the measurements is a 
Type A uncertainty component [5,6], which is mainly derived from the geometrical nonuniformity of the specimen 
under test, but which also includes instrumental random variation during the measurement process.  The statistical 
variation  of  the  measurements  s  is  calculated  as  one  standard  deviation (1)  of  the  set  of  values  measured  at 
different positions on the measuring area, as shown in Figure 2.  The system standard uncertainty u(I) for Ra is the 
quadratic sum of seven uncertainty components.  These are derived from [7]: 
 
 

1.  Geometrical  nonuniformity  and  surface  finish  of  the  step-height  used  to  calibrate  the  stylus  instrument 
producing small variations in the z-scale calibration constant of the stylus instrument from day to day. 
2.  Noise in the instrument transducer, the sampling and digitizing processes in the controller, round-off in the 
software  computations,  and  imperfections  in  the  surface  topography  of  the  reference  datum  of  the 
instrument also producing variations in the z-scale calibration constant from day to day. 

 

3.  Variations in the measured Ra values due to nonlinearity in the instrument transducer. 
4.  Uncertainty  in  the  average height of  the  step-height  master  as determined  from  interferometric  and other 

5.  Uncertainty  in  the horizontal  resolution of the  instrument  due  to  the  stylus  radius [4] or  to  the frequency 

6.  Nonuniformity of the surface giving rise to the systematic variation of the Ra value described above. 
7.  Potential long-term variation in the surface; the estimate is based on control charts of SRM check standards 

 
 

 

 
 

measurements of it. 

response of the electronics. 

maintained over 15 years. 

 
Components 1, 2, and 7 are Type A components estimated by statistical methods.  The other components are Type B 
components, which are estimated by other means [5,6].  The combined standard uncertainty for Ra is calculated as 
uc (Ra) = 0.0067 µm; the expanded uncertainty for Ra is calculated as U (Ra) = 0.013 µm (k = 2). 

SRM 2074 
 

Page 3 of 5 

Because the wavelength of this SRM is only 40 µm, the measured value for Ra depends somewhat on the resolution 
of the instrument used to measure the specimen.  NIST estimates that the value of Ra may be as much as 0.05 µm 
smaller when measured with a stylus having a 10 µm radius than when measured with a stylus having a 2 µm radius. 
Therefore, the uncertainties quoted above should be used only for calibrations performed with a stylus having a tip 
radius 5 µm or smaller.  Accordingly, for optical or other types of profiling instruments, the lateral resolution of the 
instrument should also be 5 µm or smaller. 
 
The values for D are slightly smaller along the central row of profile traces than those along traces at the top and 
bottom rows, because of the slight curvature of the machining marks on the specimen.  Therefore, the quoted value 
for D is an average of results for only the three central positions marked “D” in Figure 2.  The combined standard 
uncertainty for D is the quadratic sum of several standard uncertainty components.  These are: 
 
 

1.  A  single  component  that  represents  the  instrument  variability  combined  with  the  nonuniformity  of  the 

2.  Uncertainty in the vacuum wavelength of the HeNe laser interferometer. 
3.  Uncertainty in the HeNe wavelength due to the uncertainty in the temperature, pressure, and humidity of 

specimen. 

the laboratory. 

4.  Uncertainty in the temperature of the SRM itself leading to dimensional uncertainty. 
5.  Possible variation in the interferometric path length due to possible variation in the air temperature, and the 

base plate temperature during a single measurement cycle. 

6.  Possible cosine errors in the specimen alignment. 
7.  Possible errors associated with Abbe offset. 
8.  Nonuniformity  of  the  D  parameters  over  the  certified  area  due  to  the  curvature  of  the  machining  marks.  
The value for D is quoted for the central axis of the specimen.  Any misalignment would tend to increase 
the D value.  Hence, the uncertainty interval for this component is only in the positive direction. 

9.  Potential long-term variation in the surface. 

 
 
Components 1  and  9  are  Type A  uncertainty  components;  the  other  components  are Type B [5,6].   The  combined 
standard uncertainty for D is calculated as uc (D) = (+0.0239 µm, –0.0063 µm); the combined expanded uncertainty 
for D is calculated as U (D) = (+0.048 µm, –0.013µm) (k = 2). 
 
Calibration Service:  The NIST Semiconductor and Dimensional Metrology Division will verify the calibration of 
SRM specimens for a fee.  To inquire about the service, call (301) 975-2200. 
 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

SRM 2074 
 

Page 4 of 5 

REFERENCES 

Song, J.F.; Vorburger, T.V.; Verifying measurement uncertainty using a control chart with dynamic control 
limits, NCSL International Measure, 2 (3), p. 76, (September 2007). 
ASME B46.1-2009, Surface Texture, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, New York, 2010. 
ISO  Standard  4287:1997(E/F),  Geometrical  Product  Specifications  (GPS)  –  Surface  texture:  Profile 
method – Terms, Definitions and Surface Texture Parameters, International Standards Organization (ISO), 
Geneva, (1997). 
Vorburger, T.V.;  Teague E.C;  Scire, F.E.  and  Rosberry, F.W.;  “Measurement  of  Stylus  Radii,”  Wear, 
Vol. 57, p. 39, (1979). 
Taylor, B.N.  and  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST 
Measurement  Results,  NIST  Technical  Note 1297  (National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology, 
Gaithersburg, MD, 1993), available at http://physics.nist.gov/Pubs/. (accessed Dec 2012) 
JCGM  100:2008;  Evaluation  of  Measurement  Data  —  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in 
Measurement (ISO GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections); Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (2008); 
available 
(accessed 
Dec 2012) 
“Appendix A, Measurement Conditions and Sources of Uncertainties for NIST Surface Roughness and Step 
Height Calibration Reports”, January 2008, http://www.nist.gov/pml/div683/grp02/upload/nistsurfcalib.pdf 
(accessed Dec 2012) 

http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf 

at 

 

 
[1] 

[2] 
[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Certificate  Revision  History:    26 February 2013 (Editorial  correction  of  the  certified  value  for  roughness  average, Ra;  editorial  changes) 
10 February 2011 (Re-certification resulting in updated expanded uncertainties for roughness average, Ra, and surface wavelength, D; editorial 
changes); 25 June 1992 (original certificate date). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users of this SRM should ensure that the Certificate in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished by 
contacting the SRM Program:  telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the 
Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 2074 
 

Page 5 of 5 

