U.S.  De 

National 
Ernest 

      
Se  National  Bureau  of  Standards 

Bu 

Standard  Reference  Material 

2083 

Certificate 

Socketed  Ball  Bar 

Set  No. 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM) is  designed  for  application  in  measuring  the  performance  of  coordinate 
measuring  machines  (CMM’s)  in  accordance  with  the  proposed  ASME  Standard  B89.1.12. 

SRM  2083 is  a  socketed  ball  bar  set  comprised  of  a  set  of  three  precision  balls,  pinned  and  cemented  onto  threaded  shafts, 
one  table-mount  magnetic  socket,  one  ram-mount  magnetic  socket,  and  five  partially-insulated  extension.  tubes  of 
lengths  50,  100,  200,  400,  and  800  millimeters,  The  assembly  of  two  balls  and  any  of  the  thirty-three  possible  combinations 
of  extension  tubes  provide  ball  bar  measuring  lengths  from  100  to  1650  millimeters,  in  50  millimeter  increments.  The 
nominal  coefficient  of  thermal  expansion  of  the  steel  extension  tubes  is  11.5  x  10  °C  (+10  percent). 

a  CMM  using  SRM  2083  depends  on  many  factors  (see  Reference  1).  Among  these 
The  performance  evaluation  of 
factors  are  the  roundness  of  the  balls  and  truth  of  rotation  of  the  balls  in  their  magnetic  sockets.  The  balls  furnished  with 
this  SRM  have  been  measured  for  roundness  after  each  ball  was  pinned  and  cemented  to  its  shaft  and  thermally  cycled 
for  ten  days.  The  deviation  from  roundness  for  each  ball  is  less  than  0.25  micrometers  (10  microinches)  around  three 
diameters. 

Three  roundness  traces  for  each  ball  accompany  this  Certificate,  Trace  number  |  is  an  equatorial  trace,  with  the  “south 
pole”  of  the  ball  defined  by  the  shaft  and  the  ball  front  defined  by  the  ball  number  stamped  in  the  shaft.  Trace  number  2is 
as  nearly  circumpolar  as  practical,  making  its  nearest  approach  to  the  “south  pole”  in  the  front  of  the  ball.  Trace 
is  similar  to  trace  number  2,  but  it  makes  its  nearest  approach  to  the  “south  pole”  in  the  back  of  the  ball.  These 
number 3 
traces,  though  not  required  by  ASME  Standard  B89.1.12,  provide  a  reference  for  precise  verification  of  continued  bali 
roundness  and,  in  situations  where  the  magnetic  sockets  are  not  utilized,  provide  the  user  with  assurance  that  the  true  ball 
center  may  be  readily  obtainable  from  a  minimal  number  of  measurements. 

Besides  the  measurements  for  bal]  roundness,  each  ball  is  subjected  to  a  functional  test  in  the  magnetic  sockets.  The 
combination  of  ball  and  socket  is  certified  to  provide  effective  ball  rotation  about  a  point  with  measured  deviations  less 
than  0.25  micrometers  (10  microinches)  measured  by  contacting  the  ball  with  an  indicator,  as  it  is  rotated  through its  full 
range  of  possible  orientations. 

The  detailed  method  for  use  of  the  socketed  ball  bar in  testing  the  performance  of  CMM’s is  provided in  Section  5.  Sof 
ASME  Standard  B89.1.12.  Additional  information  on  socketed  ball  bars  has  been  published  separately  by  Bryan  2  and 

-  Kunzmann. 

The  design  of  NBS  SRM  2083  was  developed  by  R.J.  Hocken,  T.  Charlton,  and  W.C.  Haight,  of  the  NBS  Automated 
Production  Technology  Division,  and  S.  Gerner,  S.  Wiser,  and  M.  Osti,  of  the  NBS  Fabrication  Technology  Division. 

The  ball  roundness  was  measured  by  S.  Gerner  and  J.  Zimmerman  of  the  Automated  Production  Technology  Division, 
using  a  roundness  measuring  instrument. 

Final  functional  testing  and  quality  assurance  was  performed  by  J.  Zimmerman. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  Standard  Reference 
Material  were  coordinated  through  the  Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials  by  R.  W.  Seward. 

Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 
August  8,  1985 
(Revision  of  Certificate 
dated  12-19-83) 

  

Stanley  D.  Rasberry,  Chief 
Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials 

(Over) 

       

Recertification  of  this  SRM  is  not  required  by  ASME  Standard  B89.1.12.  NBS  recommends  that  the  truth  of  rotation  of 
the  balls  in  the  sockets  be  tested  before  each  use  and  that  the  SRM  be  recertified  if  the  deviation  measured  exceeds  one 
half  of  the  working  tolerance  of  the  machine  under  test. 

References 
1.  Proposed  Standard  for  Performance  Evaluation  of  Coordinate  Measuring  Machines,  B89.1.12M,  The  American 

Society  of  Mechanical  Engineers,  New  York,  N.Y. 

2.  Bryan,  J.B.,  Precision  Engineering,  Vol.  4,  No.  2  (April  1982),  Butterworth  Scientific  Ltd.,  Guildford,  Surrey,  U.K. 
3,  Kunzmann,  H.,  Waldele,  F.,  CIRP  Annals,  1983,  Hallwag  Ltd.,  Berne,  Switzerland. 

  

 

  

