National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate  
Standard Reference Material® 2100a 

 

 
Fracture Toughness of Ceramics 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended for verification of fracture toughness testing procedures.  This SRM 
may be used with any fracture toughness test method, but is optimized for beam bending testing configurations.  A unit 
of SRM 2100a consists of a set of five hot-pressed silicon nitride flexure specimens cut from a single billet (plate) of 
material. 
 
The  SRM  may  be  used  in  conjunction  with  American  Society  of  Testing  and  Materials (ASTM)  fracture  toughness 
standard C1421-99 [1].  This SRM may also be used with three International Standards Organization (ISO) standard tests 
prepared by ISO Technical Committee TC 206, Fine Ceramics [2,3,4]. 
 
Certified Fracture Toughness:  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its 
accuracy in that all known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [5].  NIST tested 
a  large  number  (15 %  to  20 %  of  the  total)  of  specimens  taken  at  random  from  three  billets  (see  Appendix A, 
Specimen  and  Crack  Plane  Orientation).    Most  of  the  specimens  were  tested  at  NIST  by  the  surface  crack  in 
flexure (SCF) and precracked beam [PB, also known as single-edged precracked beam (SEPB)] methods in accordance 
with ASTM C1421 [1], see Figure 1.  In addition, ten specimens taken from SRM 2100 (billet C), one of the three 
billets,  were  also  tested  by  the  chevron  notch  in  bending (CNB)  test  configuration A,  also  in  accordance  with 
C1421 [1].    The  mean  toughness  values  as  measured  by  the  three  test  methods  agreed  to  within  0.4 %  to  1.6 %, 
depending upon the billet, confirming that fracture toughness was independent of test method.  Additional details are 
given in Appendix B. 
 

Table 1.  Certified Fracture Toughness(a) 
  

 

Billet 

Fracture 
Toughness,  KIc 

Uncertainty, U1, in Fracture 
Toughness of a Single 
Specimen 

Uncertainty, Um, in the Mean 
Fracture Toughness 
For n = 5 Specimens 

    
    

0.307 MPa·m½ (7.2 %) 

0.145 MPa·m½ (3.4 %) 

4.268 MPa·m½ 

G 

  

  

  

 
(a)  The uncertainties are at the 95 % confidence level.  The numbers in parenthesis are the uncertainties expressed as a percentage of 
percentage  of 
the mean fracture toughness.  The measurand is the mean fracture toughness listed in Table 1.  Metrological traceability is to the 
SI derived unit for toughness (expressed as MPa·m½). 

leve 

 
The  average  fracture  toughness  and  the  scatter  in  results  as  measured  by  the  three  test  methods  were  statistically 
indistinguishable, and the data, therefore, was pooled.  The certified average fracture toughness in Table 1 is the grand 
average of the pooled NIST data base for billet G. 
 
Expiration  of  Certification:    The  certification  of  SRM 2100a  is  valid  indefinitely,  within  the  measurement 
uncertainty specified, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with instructions given in this certificate 
(see  “Instructions  for  Storage,  Handling,  and  Use”).    This  certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is  damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical changes occur that affect the certification, NIST will notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet 
or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
This SRM was prepared by G.D. Quinn of the NIST Materials Measurement Science Division, with assistance from 
K. Xu and R.J. Gettings formerly of NIST.   
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  03 March 2016 

John A. Small, Chief 
Materials Measurement Science Division 

Steven J. Choquette, Acting Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

2asurement  Science

 

Page 1 of 10 

  

SRM 2100a 

ded  by  N.F. 

Statistical consultation was provided by N.F. Zhang of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
J.J. Swab of the U.S. Army Research Laboratory assisted with preliminary experiments.  CNB tests were performed by 
J.A. Salem of NASA-Glenn Center. 
 
xd  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
SOURCE, PREPARATION, AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
Description of SRM:  This SRM was prepared from material acquired during the 1970 to 1980’s and consists of a set 
of 5 unprecracked ceramic test specimens of hot-pressed silicon nitride (HPSN), Norton Grade NC 132, manufactured 
by Norton Co. (Worcester, MA).  The NC 132 HPSN was originally fabricated in the form of a billet of nominal size 
158 mm × 158 mm square with a thickness of 20 mm to 30 mm.  The specimens were sliced from the billet such that the 
3 mm × 4 mm  cross  section  plane  (in  which  cracks  will  be  initiated  and  propagated)  is  parallel  to  the  hot  pressing 
direction as described in detail in Appendix A.  This material was hot-pressed with a small amount (about 1 wt %) of 
magnesium oxide (or a magnesium compound which yields MgO when heated) sintering aid and is primarily composed 
of slightly elongated beta silicon nitride grains.  A small amount of amorphous second phase resides in small triple point 
pockets  or  as  thin  layers  between  the  silicon  nitride  grains.    Some  small  tungsten  carbide  inclusions  are  dispersed 
throughout the material.  This material fractures in a mixed transgranular and intergranular mode.  It has a flat R-curve( 2) 
and is highly resistant to environmentally-assisted slow crack growth at room temperature.  Consequently, different test 
methods produce virtually identical toughness results. 
 
billets.  There  were  three 
There is a statistically significant difference in fracture toughness for specimens from different billets.  There were three 
na 
separate billets produced from the acquired material.  The specimens in this SRM kit are all from a single billet designed 
each  specimen 
“G” which is listed in the first column of Table 1 and scribed onto one end face of each specimen. 
 
 

single 

  

SCF 

  

  

  

  

  

  

SEPB 

CNE 

 

 
Figure 1.  The three fracture toughness test methods in C1421 and in ISO 18756, ISO 15732, and ISO 24370.  The insert 
imens  may  be  precracked  and 
depicts the specimen cross sections and the types of precracks.  Note that the SCF specimens may be precracked and 
tested in either of two possible orientations. 
 
Each 3 mm × 4 mm × (45 to 47) mm flexure bar specimen was prepared in accordance with conventional flexure strength 
standards MIL STD 1942(A) [6], ASTM C 1161 [7], and ISO standard 14704 [8], as well as with ASTM C1421 [1] and 
ISO 18756 [2], ISO 15732 [3], and ISO 24370 [4] for fracture toughness testing of ceramics.  In addition, one 4 mm wide 
face has a 900 grit finish which is finer than is normally required and is provided as a convenience to users who wish to 
precrack with a Knoop indenter for the SCF test method.  The edges of the specimens have been chamfered in accordance 
with requirements for the surface crack in flexure (SCF) and single-edged precracked beam (SEPB) test methods.  (A 
small correction factor for the chamfer should be applied to SCF results as described in Appendix C.) 
 

we  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the
(1) Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 

                                                           

  

(2) Crack growth resistance (R) is independent of crack size. 

 

SRM 2100a 

Page 2 of 10 

Discussion of Uncertainties:  The uncertainty estimates were made according to the ISO/JCGM Guide [9] and consisted 
of  Type A  uncertainties  evaluated  by  statistical  means.    NIST  tested  a  large  number  (15 %  to  20 %  of  the  total)  of 
specimens taken at random from each billet used.  Most of the specimens were tested to fracture by one of the three 
standard test method procedures: SCF, CNB, or PB (SEPB).  Additional PB (SEPB) experiments were performed on the 
broken halves. 
 
The uncertainty, U1, in Table 1 is a 95 % prediction uncertainty for a single future observation, based on the results of 
the NIST independently and randomly selected observations from the same population [10].  The uncertainty, Um, is a 
95 % prediction uncertainty for the mean of five future observations, also based on the results of the NIST independently 
and randomly selected observations.  The expanded uncertainty is calculated as U = kuc where uc is, at the level of one 
standard deviation, and represents the combined effects of material inhomogeneity and within-laboratory components of 
uncertainty.  U1 is the uncertainty for an individual specimen, and Um is the uncertainty in the mean fracture toughness 
for the five specimens in this kit.  The coverage factor, k, is determined from the Student’s t-distribution corresponding 
to the degrees of freedom appropriate to the number of specimens tested at NIST and at the 95 % confidence level. 
 
HANDLING  AND  USE 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE, HANDLING AND USE 
 
Storage and Handling:  The specimens are packaged in conventional ceramic flexure specimen trays.  The specimens 
are durable; no special handling requirements are necessary.  Once precracked, the CNB and SEPB specimens should be 
handled with care to avoid accidental breakage. 
 
ad  for
Use:  This SRM may be used with any fracture toughness test method although the specimens have been optimized for 
flexural modes of loading.  The user must precrack the specimens.  It is strongly recommended that the user test these 
specimens only after they have acquired some familiarity with the test method. 
 
The  certified  fracture  toughness  values  are  valid  for  cracks  propagated  in  planes  that  are  parallel  to  the  specimen 
3 mm × 4 mm cross section.  Cracks may be initiated or propagated from either the 3 mm wide or the 4 mm  wide 
surfaces.  The fracture toughness is not certified for cracks propagated on planes parallel to the specimens’ long axis.  
See Appendix A for further details. 
 
Consult ASTM C1421 [1] or ISO 18756 [2], ISO 15732 [3], or ISO 24370 [4] for specific test method details if the SCF, 
PB (SEPB), or CNB methods are used. 
 
Test Specimens:  Although the specimens are from a single billet, their dimensions should be measured individually 
due to slight variations in machining.  The specimen chamfers should also be measured if the SCF method is used. 
 
Test Fixtures:  The specimens are suitable for flexural modes of loading with conventional flexure strength fixtures.  
Common  20 mm × 40 mm  (or  10 mm × 20 mm)  four-point  flexure  strength  fixtures  that  are  designed  to  be  in 
accordance with the well-known standard flexure strength test standards are satisfactory for all three fracture toughness 
methods.    Users  are  reminded  that  there  are  critical  requirements  for  fixture  alignment,  load  pin  and  specimen 
alignment, fixture articulation, and load pin rolling action to eliminate friction constraints that will bias the test result. 
 
Four-point flexural loading is preferred for SCF and CNB testing.  Spans of 20 mm × 40 mm are recommended, but 
not required.  The PB (SEPB) test may be conducted in either three- or four-point loading.  The outer span should be 
between 16 mm and 40 mm.  Three-point loading should be performed with extra caution since it may be difficult to 
align the precrack with the middle roller, especially with short 16 mm to 20 mm spans.(3)  The specimens in the SRM 
kit may be fractured on full-sized 20 mm × 40 mm fixtures.  The halves may then be precracked and retested on shorter 
three- or four-point fixture spans. 
 
Testing Rates:  Testing rates between 0.1 MPa·m½/s and 2.75 MPa·m½/s are specified for normal testing [1].  Fracture 
toughness  is  independent  of  test  environment  (in  laboratory  air  ambient  conditions,  20 °C  to  25 °C,  with  relative 
humidities of 20 % to 60 % or in dry-nitrogen gas) when normal testing rates were employed. 
 
 

 

                                                           

(3) Some tests are apt to be unacceptable and rejected due to twisted fracture planes. 

SRM 2100a 

 

Page 3 of 10 

SCF  Precracking  and  Testing:    The  following  information  may  be  helpful  if  the  SCF  method  is  utilized.    SCF 
specimens may be precracked at a 24.5 N (2.5 kgf) or 49.0 N (5 kgf) Knoop indentation load.  The 24.5 N load is 
preferred since the resulting indentation is smaller, and less material needs to be removed by polishing or hand grinding 
after indentation.  Most of the NIST SRM database was generated with this load, and a VAMAS round robin confirmed 
that this load was eminently suitable.  One 4 mm wide face has been given a finer finish (900 grit) than is customary 
for flexure specimens and is suitable for Knoop indentation.  The Knoop indentation alternatively may be implanted 
on one of the 3 mm wide faces, but these should be fine ground, lapped, or polished to provide a flat, even surface for 
the Knoop indentation.(4)  If an indentation load of 24.5 N is used and the proper amount of material has been removed 
by polishing or hand grinding with abrasives, the precrack size should be approximately 50 µm deep × 150 µm wide.  
Machining the residual stress damage zone off the specimen’s surface with the use of diamond grinding wheels is 
possible, but not recommended.(5) 
 
Four-point loading is required for the SCF configuration since it is very difficult to align the tiny precrack with the 
middle load roller in three-point loading.   Fracture loads are modest, (typically 400 N to 600 N for 24.5 N precracks 
in 20 mm × 40 mm four-point fixtures), so no special handling precautions need be taken.  The flexure strength of the 
flawed  specimen,  and  thus  its  fracture  toughness,  should  be  corrected  for  the  chamfers  in  SCF  tests.    An  average 
chamfer size should be measured and used for the correction as described in Appendix C.  Consult ASTM C1421 for 
additional details.  Appendix D has details on the precision error associated with this test method. 
 
CNB Precracking and Testing:  The specimens in this SRM are in accordance with configurations “A” and “D” in 
ASTM C1421, which require four-point loading.  Proper chevron notch preparation is critical.  The notch should be 
uniform,  the  grooves  should  align  very  closely,  and  the  back  sides  of  the  chevron  (dimensions  a11  and  a12  in 
ASTM C1421) must not cut through to the specimen back face.  Causal notching with a diamond cut off wheel is 
usually unsatisfactory.  A precision set up and specimen holder is optimal.   
 
The  “A”  configuration  CNB  specimen-fixture  combination  in  ASTM C1421  requires  four-point  flexure  testing. 
Fracture loads are small, (typically 20 N to 50 N depending upon loading configuration), so care should be exercised 
in handling and preloading these specimens.  Cracks should pop in or extend stably from the chevron tip during a 
normal fracture toughness test provided that the chevron notch has been prepared properly.  The specimens in this 
SRM have been prepared with edge chamfers which are not required or recommended for CNB testing, but experience 
has shown that the chamfers  do not interfere  with the results for this SRM.  Consult  ASTM C1421 for additional 
details.  Appendix D has details on the precision error associated with this test method. 
 
PB (SEPB) Precracking and Testing:  The following information may be helpful if the PB (SEPB) method is utilized.  
Conventional bridge precrackers may be used to pop in a precrack that is between 0.35 W and 0.60 W deep, where 
W, the specimen thickness, is 4 mm.  A starter flaw is carefully centered in the bridge anvil precracker.  A single 98 N 
(10 kgf)  Knoop  has  been  found  to  be  satisfactory,  provided  that  the  long  axis  is  lined  up  perpendicularly  to  the 
specimen long axis.  The indentation may be placed directly into the ground 3 mm wide face.  A finely ground or 
polished surface is unnecessary.  With a 6 mm bridge gap, bridge anvil pop-in loads should be between 8 000 N and 
11 000 N.  One or more aligned Vickers indentations may be used, provided that the indentation load does not exceed 
98 N (10 kgf).  A shallow saw cut may also serve as a starter flaw.  
 
Either three-or four-point loading may be used, but extra precautions are necessary with the former to guarantee that 
the precrack is lined up with the middle roller.  Fracture loads will be small (50 N to 120 N depending upon testing 
configuration and precrack size), so care should be exercised in handling and preloading the specimens.  No correction 
for specimen chamfers should be made.  Consult ASTM C1421 for additional details.  Appendix D has details on the 
precision error associated with this test method. 
 
Other Precracking Testing Methods:  Other test methods may be used with this SRM, but since the specimens are 
optimal for flexure testing, some configurations such as double torsion, double cantilever beam, etc., are not feasible.  
The Vickers indentation crack length method is not recommended due to the lack of a universally accepted equation 
for relating crack length to toughness, the  lack of a  universally accepted indentation load, and other experimental 
difficulties  which  have  been  confirmed  by  a  VAMAS  round  robin  project on  similar  materials [11].    Crack  plane 
orientation  is  also  an  issue  with  this  method,  since  it  is  known  that  the  fracture  toughness  is  different  for  cracks 
extending  in  the  plane  perpendicular  to  the  hot-pressing  direction  compared  to  cracks  running  parallel  to  the 
                                                           

ith  a  cloth  polishing  wheel  and  diamond
(4)One method utilized at NIST is to use a motorized hobby drill (e.g. Dremel) with a cloth polishing wheel and diamond 

paste to polish a small spot in the middle of the specimen. 

(5) Experiments at NIST confirmed that the identical mean fracture toughness is obtained, but the standard deviation was 
considerably larger.   The SCF precracks  were not as regular as those from hand ground or lapped specimens.   Apparently the 
machine grinding altered the precracks and possibly propagated portions of the crack front.  It is also difficult to guarantee that 
each specimen has had the correct amount of material removed when using diamond wheel grinding, especially if the specimens 
are mounted and ground together. 
SRM 2100a 

Page 4 of 10 

 

hot-pressing direction.  Under no circumstances should this SRM be used to generate a so-called “universal calibration 
constant” for the Vickers indentation crack length method, since it is impossible for a single constant to apply to a 
wide range of ceramics. 
 
Repeat  Testing:    Broken  halves  of  the  specimens  may  be  retested.    PB (SEPB)  testing  at  NIST  on  two  billets 
demonstrated there was no difference in outcomes for full-size specimens tested on 20 mm × 40 mm four point fixtures 
versus outcomes from specimen halves tested on 10 mm × 20 mm spans, or halves tested on three-point fixtures with 
20 mm  spans.    The  reject  rate  for  the  three  point  configuration  was  greater,  however,  due  to  crack  twisting  and 
alignment problems. 
 
Additional Information:  Additional information on the development of the three billets is provided in references 22 
to 25.  Reference 22 provides additional information on how the uncertainties were calculated. 
 

:  Additional  information 

the  three  billets  i 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  ASTM C1421; Standard Test Methods for Fracture Toughness of Advanced Ceramics; In Annu. Book ASTM 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

Stand., Vol. 15.01; ASTM: West Conshohocken, PA. 
ISO 18756;  Fine  Ceramics  (Advanced  Ceramics,  Advanced  Technical  Ceramics) – Determination  of  Fracture 
Toughness of Monolithic Ceramics at Room Temperature by the Surface Crack in Flexure (SCF) Method; In Fine 
Ceramics; ISO, TC 206. 
ISO 15732;  Fine  Ceramics  (Advanced  Ceramics,  Advanced  Technical  Ceramics) – Test  Method  for  Fracture 
Toughness of Monolithic Ceramics at Room Temperature by Single Edge Precracked Beam (SEPB) Method; In 
Fine Ceramics; ISO, TC 206. 
ISO 24370;  Fine  Ceramics  (Advanced  Ceramics,  Advanced  Technical  Ceramics) – Test  Method  for  Fracture 
Toughness  of  Monolithic  Ceramics  at  Room  Temperature  by  Chevron-Notch  Beam  (CNB)  Method;  In  Fine 
Ceramics; ISO, TC 206. 

[5]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value Assignment of 
Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136  (2000);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF (accessed Mar 2016). 

[6]  MIL STD 1942A;  Flexural  Strength  of  High  Performance  Ceramics  at  Ambient  Temperature;  U.S.  Army 

Materials Technology Laboratory: Watertown, MA (8 November 1990). 

[7]  ASTM C1161; Standard Test Method for Flexural Strength of Advanced Ceramics at Ambient Temperature; In 

[8] 

[9] 

Annu. Book ASTM Stand., Vol. 15.01; ASTM: West Conshohocken, PA. 
ISO 14704;  Fine  Ceramics  (Advanced  Ceramics,  Advanced  Technical  Ceramics) – Test  Method  for  Flexural 
Strength of Monotonic Ceramics at Room Temperature; In Fine Ceramics; ISO, TC 206. 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections); Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (JCGM) (2008); available at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Mar 2016);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results;  NIST Technical  Note 1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/tn1297/index.cfm (accessed Mar 2016). 

[10]  Hahn, G; Meeker, W.; Statistical Intervals: A Guide for Practitioners; John Wiley and Sons: NY (1991). 
[11]  Quinn, G.D.;  Salem, J.A.;  Bar-on, I.;  Cho, K.;  Foley, M.W.;  Fang, H.;  Fracture  Toughness  of  Advanced 

Ceramics at Room Temperature; J. Res. NIST, Vol. 97 (5), pp. 579–607 (1992). 

[12]  Petrovic, J.J.; Mendiratta, M.G.; Fracture from Controlled Surface Flaws; In Fracture Mechanics Applied to Brittle 

;  ASTM: 
Materials, ASTM STP 678; Freiman, S., Ed.; ASTM: West Conshohocken, PA, pp. 83–102 (1979). 

[13]  Petrovic, J.J.;  Dirks, R.A.;  Jacobson, L.A.;  Mendiratta, M.G.;  Effects  of  Residual  Stresses  on  Fracture  from 

Controlled Surface Flaws; J. Am. Ceram. Soc., Vol. 59(3-4), pp. 177–178 (1976). 

[14]  Quinn, G.D.; Gettings, R.J.; Kübler, J.J.; Fracture Toughness of by the Surface Crack in Flexure (SCF) Method:  

Results of the VAMAS Round Robin; Ceram. Eng. and Sci. Proc., Vol. 15(5), pp. 846–855 (1994). 

und  Robin; 

Vol. 

— 

[15]  Quinn, G.D.;  Kübler, J.J.;  Gettings, R.J.;  Fracture  Toughness  of  Advanced  Ceramics  by  the  Surface  Crack  in 
Flexure (SCF) Method:  A VAMAS Round Robin; VAMAS Technical Report #17; NIST: Gaithersburg, MD (June 
1994). 

[16]  Quinn, G.D.; Gettings, R.J.; Kübler, J.J.; Fracture Toughness of Ceramics by the Surface Crack in Flexure (SCF) 
Method;  In  Fracture  Mechanics  of  Ceramics,  Vol. 11;  Bradt, R.C.;  Hasselman, D.P.H.;  Munz, D.;  Sakai, M.; 
Yashevchenko, V., Eds.; Plenum, NY, pp. 203–218 (1996). 

[17]  Quinn, G.D.;  Gettings, R  J.;  Kübler, J.J.;  Fractography  and  the  Surface  Crack  in  Flexure  (SCF)  Method  for 
Evaluating Fracture Toughness of Ceramics; In Fractography of Glasses and Ceramics, Ceramic Transactions, 
Vol. 64; ACS: Westerville, OH, pp. 107–144 (1996). 

[18]  Nose, T.; Fuji, T.; Evaluation of Fracture Toughness for Ceramic Materials by a Single-Edge-Precracked-Beam 

Vol. 
Method; J. Am. Ceram. Soc., Vol. 71(5), pp. 328–333 (1988). 

-

SRM 2100a 

 

Page 5 of 10 

[19]  Salem, J.;  Shannon, J.,  Jr.;  Jenkins, M.;  Some  Observations  in  Fracture  Toughness  and  Fatigue  Testing  with 
Chevron-Notched  Specimens;  In  Chevron  Notch  Test  Experience:  Metals  and  Non-Metals,  ASTM  STP  1172; 
Brown, K.; Baratta, F., Eds., ASTM: West Conshohocken, PA, pp. 9–25 (1992). 

[20]  Baratta, F.I.;  Quinn, G.D.;  Matthews, W.T.;  Errors  Associated  With  Flexure  Testing  of  Brittle  Materials.; 
Technical Report MTL TR 87-35; U.S. Army Materials Technology Laboratory: Watertown, MA (July 1987). 
[21]  ASTM E 691; Practice for Conducting an Interlaboratory Study to Determine the Precision of a Test Method; 

cy:

Vol. 14.02, ASTM: West Conshohocken, PA. 

[22]  Quinn, G.D.;  Xu, K.;  Salem, J.A;  Swab, J.J.;  SRM 2100:  The  World’s  First  Fracture  Toughness  Reference 
Material;  In  Fracture  Mechanics  of  Glasses  and  Ceramics,  Vol. 14;  Bradt, R.C.;  Munz, D.;  Sakai, M.; 
White, K.W., Eds.; Klewer/Plenum: NY, pp. 499–530 (2005). 

[23]  Quinn, G.D.; Xu, K.; Gettings, R.; Standard Reference Material 2100: Fracture Toughness of Ceramics; Ceram. 

Eng. and Sci. Proc.; Vol. 20(3), pp. 513–523 (1999). 

[24]  Quinn, G.D.;  Xu, K.;  Gettings, R.J.;  Salem, J.A.;  Swab, J.J.;  Standard  Reference  Material  2100:  Ceramic 
Fracture Toughness; In Fatigue and Fracture Mechanics, Vol. 32, ASTM STP 1406; Chona, R., Ed., ASTM: 
West Conshohocken, PA, pp. 336–350 (2001). 

[25]  Quinn, G.D.; Xu, K.; Gettings, R.J.; Salem, J.A.; Swab, J.J.; Does Anyone Know the Real Fracture Toughness?  
SRM 2100: The World’s First Ceramic Fracture Toughness Reference Material; In Fracture Resistance Testing 
of Monolithic and Composite Brittle Materials, ASTM STP 1409; Salem, J.A.; Quinn, G.D.; Jenkins, M.G., Eds. 
ASTM: West Conshohocken, PA, pp. 76–93 (2002). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users of this SRM should ensure that the Certificate in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished by 
contacting 
948-3730;  
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 
 

975-2200; 

Program: 

telephone 

(301) 

(301) 

SRM 

fax 

the 

SRM 2100a 

 

Page 6 of 10 

APPENDIX A 
 
Specimen and Crack Plane Orientation 

HP  direction 

Hot-pressing  (HP)  direction 

 
All specimens were cut from the hot-pressed silicon nitride plates as illustrated in the figure below.  Fracture toughness 
‘rack  propagation 
was measured and is certified only for crack planes that are parallel to the hot-pressing direction.  Crack propagation 
may be in either the direction parallel to or perpendicular to the hot-pressing direction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

\,  badd 

  

 
o
w

 
 
The small arrows show the direction of crack extension. 

CNB  SEPB 

SCF 

SCF

 
 
Identical  results  are  obtained  in  SCF experiments  with  artificial  precracks  implanted  on  the  narrow  3 mm  specimen 
surfaces  as  compared  to  specimens  with  cracks  implanted  on  the  4 mm  faces.    In  addition,  PB (SEPB)  and  CNB 
experiments  wherein  the  crack  extended  in  the  direction  as  the  4 mm  edge  produced  results  identical  to  the  SCF 
experiments wherein the crack started on the 4 mm wide face and propagated into specimens parallel to the 3 mm face. 
 
ASTM C1421 recommends that the crack plane and the crack extension direction be defined in relation to the plate.  The 
identification scheme is a set of letters first indicating the crack plane, then a second set of letters which designate the 
direction of crack extension in that plane.  The first letter which describes the crack plane is designated by the vector that 
is normal to the crack plane.  By this nomenclature scheme, all crack planes and crack extensions in this SRM are “X-HP”, 
“X-Y”, “Y-HP”, or “Y-X”.  Fracture toughness is not certified for crack planes that are perpendicular to the hot-pressing 
direction (“HP-X” or “HP-Y” fracture systems).  The fracture toughness is smaller for these crack planes. 

SRM 2100a 

 

Page 7 of 10 

 

APPENDIX B 

Additional Background Information 

 
The fracture toughness data for this SRM was generated by the three test methods in the ASTM standard test method 
[1]. 
 
The  SCF  method,  also  known  as  the  “controlled  flaw”  method,  is  a  development  of  early  work  by  Petrovic  and 
colleagues [12,13].    This  innovative  method  utilizes  a  Knoop  indenter  to  create  a  micro,  semielliptical  surface 
precrack.  It is essential that residual stresses from the indentation are eliminated by polishing or hand grinding the 
indentation  away  after  indentation.    The  specimen  is  fractured  in  a  conventional  flexural  strength  test  fixture.  
Fractographic  techniques  are  used  to  detect  and  measure  the  precrack  after  specimen  fracture.    The  name  of  this 
method has been changed to “surface crack in flexure” in order to avoid confusion with other so-called controlled flaw 
methods and to make it consistent with fracture mechanics conventions.  Fracture toughness is computed from the 
stress (or maximum load) at fracture, the crack size, and stress intensity factor solutions.  The latter factor should be 
individually calculated for each specimen precrack.  Additional details are in the literature [14-17]. 
 
The PB (SEPB) method is widely accepted in the fracture mechanics and ceramics community in large part since it is 
a traditional fracture mechanics configuration with a good record for producing accurate and precise results.  A variant 
on the older single-edged notched beam method, the PB (SEPB) method uses an innovative precracking procedure 
(compression bridge-anvil loading) to produce a sharp precrack [18].  A saw cut or indentation is placed in the narrow 
side of a flexure specimen.  The specimens are placed into a compression-anvil precracking apparatus and loaded 
carefully  until a precrack pops in.  The specimen is fractured in a  flexure  fixture.   Crack size is  measured on the 
fracture surface.  Fracture toughness is computed on the basis of the specimen and  fixture dimensions, the load at 
fracture, and stress intensity factor formulations. 
 
The CNB test entails loading a chevron-notched specimen to fracture in a flexure fixture.  The crack initiates at the 
chevron tip and then propagates stabily through the chevron.  Since generalized stress intensity factor solutions do not 
exist for CNB testing, it is necessary to specify very specific specimen and notch configurations.  The 3 mm × 4 mm 
cross  section  sized  specimens  in  this  SRM  are  suitable  for  use  as  either  configuration  A  or  D  in  ASTM  C1421.  
Stringent requirements are placed upon the specimen preparation since successful outcomes, which rely upon stable 
crack  extension,  depend  upon  having  well-machined  notches [19].    Stress  intensity  factor  coefficients  are  very 
sensitive to the precise chevron geometries.  Analytical errors of 10 % or more are possible if formulas for idealized 
chevron  geometries  are  applied  to  casually-fabricated  specimens.    It  is  especially  important  that:    the  two  notch 
grooves (one on either side of the specimen) meet very closely without an offset, the notch tip be well centered, the 
sides of the chevron be very symmetric about the specimen centerline, and the sides of the chevron should end on the 
specimen side and not break through to the back surface.  Proper specimen preparation requires careful machining by 
an experienced laboratory or machine shop, but experience shows this can be quite routine.  Casual notch preparation 
by a student with a cut off wheel in a laboratory will not suffice.  Misalignments in the chevron will promote unstable 
crack propagation that will invalidate the test.  Experienced machine shops usually have a custom specimen holder to 
position the specimen while the chevron is cut from one side.  The specimen or holder is flipped and the chevron 
completed by cutting from the opposite side.  The specimen is tested in conventional flexure fixtures and the crack 
must be propagated stability.  Fracture toughness is computed from the maximum load during stable crack extension, 
the specimen and fixture dimensions, stress intensity factor coefficient solutions, and the precise chevron geometry 
for each specimen. 
 
A  Versailles  Advanced  Materials  and  Standards (VAMAS)  round  robin  which  featured  the  SCF  test  method  on 
NC 132 hot-pressed silicon nitride obtained extraordinarily consistent results from 20 laboratories around the world.  
Fracture toughness results for NC 132 in the literature from many sources, by many different test methods for over 20 
years have been unusually consistent.  The crack planes were parallel to the hot-pressing direction in most of these 
studies.  In particular, results by the chevron notch in bending, short bar chevron notch, surface crack in flexure, and 
single-edged precracked beam tests converged in the range of 4.5 MPa·m½ to 4.9 MPa·m½.  The user is referred to 
references 14 to 16 for more information. 

SRM 2100a 

 

Page 8 of 10 

 

APPENDIX C 

Chamfer Correction Factors, SCF Method 

 
The fracture toughness of SCF specimens should be corrected for the corner chamfers.  The correction increases the 
calculated SCF fracture toughness outcomes slightly (usually 0.4 % to 0.9 %).  The NIST SCF fracture toughness data 
used to prepare the certified value for this SRM was corrected.  Do not correct PB (SEPB) or CNB test results for 
corner chamfers. 
 
The chamfers in the SRM specimens are typically 0.10 mm to 0.15 mm in size, although some may be larger.  The 
chamfer size, c, may be measured with a microscope having a traveling stage or from photographic analysis.  All eight 
c dimensions for the four chamfers should be measured and an average value used for the correction. 
 
The fracture toughness in SCF specimens may be calculated from the formula: 

K =
Ic

aσY
f

1/2

 

 
where Y is the appropriate stress intensity shape factor (maximum), σf is the maximum flexure stress in the specimen 
at  fracture,  and  a  is  the  crack  depth.    See  the  ASTM C1421  or  ISO 18756 SCF  standards  for  more  details  on  the 
calculation of KIc by this method. 
 
The maximum flexure stress may be calculated from simple beam theory, and it is common to assume that the cross 
section is a simple rectangle.  The chamfers alter this geometry, however, and the second moment of inertia of the 
specimen cross section about the neutral axis is altered [20].  The true maximum flexure stress at fracture is calculated 
as follows: 

σf  = F σb 

 
where σb is the apparent flexure stress for a simple rectangular beam, computed from simple beam theory, and F is a 
correction factor.  Correction factors are listed in the following tables and are practically identical for the two specimen 
orientations. 
 
Fracture toughness then may be calculated: 
 
K
 
 
 
 
 

Correction Factor, F, for 
3 mm × 4 mm Specimens 

 
Specimen Cross Section 

(
FY

Y
σ=

2/1

2/1

σ

=

)

a

a

Ic

 

b

f

Flexure  Test 
Loading  Direction 

! 

  

    

  

  

  

C 
(mm) 

0.080 
0.090 
0.100 
0.110 
0.120 
0.130 
0.140 
0.150 
0.160 
0.170 
0.180 
0.190 
0.200 
0.210 
0.220 

Correction 
factor, F 
B = 4,  W = 3 
1.003 
1.004 
1.005 
1.006 
1.007 
1.008 
1.009 
1.011 
1.012 
1.014 
1.015 
1.017 
1.019 
1.020 
1.022 

Correction 
Factor, F 
B = 3, W = 4 
1.003 
1.004 
1.005 
1.006 
1.007 
1.008 
1.009 
1.011 
1.012 
1.014 
1.015 
1.017 
1.019 
1.021 
1.023 

    

SRM 2100a 

 

Page 9 of 10 

APPENDIX D 
 
Test Method Uncertainties and VAMAS Round Robins 
 
The precision uncertainty for a measured value of fracture toughness depends upon the test method. The following 
information was not used in the preparation of the uncertainty statement for this SRM, but is included for the user’s 
benefit to help the user appreciate the common sources of uncertainty. 
 
SCF METHOD 
 
Uncertainty of Individual Test Results by the SCF Method:  In ASTM C1421, for the SCF test method, the type B 
uncertainties of the stress at fracture are estimated to be a maximum of 2 % to 3 %, the crack size measurement, 5 %, 
and the stress intensity factor coefficient, 3 % to 5 %. The latter two uncertainties are coupled, and it is estimated that 
this total uncertainty for fracture toughness is within 5 % [14-17]. 
 
A Versailles Advanced Materials and Standards (VAMAS) interlaboratory round robin [14-16] with 20 laboratories 
confirmed the practicality of the SCF test method and obtained estimates of the within-laboratory (repeatability) and 
between-laboratory  (reproducibility)  precision  uncertainties. 
  The  type A  estimates  for  repeatability  and 
reproducibility are shown in Table 1.  These results were obtained on the same material as used for this SRM (but 
from a different billet, designated “E”).  These uncertainties are for an individual test specimen and include both the 
test method uncertainty and variability in the fracture toughness from specimen to specimen.  See references 14 to 17 
for further details. 
 
Table 1.  Precision for individual test results for the SCF method from a VAMAS round robin on NC 132 hot-pressed 
silicon nitride computed in accordance with ASTM Standard E 691 [21].  Data from 19 laboratories on specimens 
from a single billet “E”.  Results from one laboratory were outliers and were deleted. 
 

 

Repeatability (Within-Lab) 
  

Reproducibility (Between-Labs) 

Average 
(MPa·m½) 

Std. Dev(a) 
(MPa·m½) 

Number of 
Specimens 

Std. Dev. 
(MPa·m½) 

 
    
    

0.32 

0.24 

4.56 

0.68 

0.31 

0.86 

102 

6.8 

5.4 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

95 % limit(a) 
(MPa·m½) 

COV(c) 
(%) 

95 % Limit(b) 
(MPa·m½) 

COV(c)
(%) 

Std. Dev. 
(MPa·m½) 

 

Notes: 

a) 
(a)  Standard deviation of all individual test results. 
(b)  Coverage factor of 2.8 in accordance with ASTM E 691 [21]. 
(c)  Coefficient of variance expressed as a percentage of the average. 

 
 
 
 
PB (SEPB) METHOD 
 
Uncertainty  of  Individual  Test  Results  by  the  SEPB  Method:    In  ASTM C1421,  the  type B  accuracy  of  the  stress 
intensity factor coefficient for the SEPB test method is estimated to be a maximum of 2 %.  No estimate was made 
for the total uncertainty. 
 
round  robin  for  a  SEPB  test  procedure  (similar 
ASTM C1421 cites results from a 16 laboratory international VAMAS round robin for a SEPB test procedure (similar 
to but not identical to that in C1421) on a gas pressure sintered silicon nitride. 
 
CNB METHOD 
 
Uncertainty of Individual Results by the CNB Method:  In ASTM C1421, it is estimated that the type B accuracy of 
the stress intensity factor coefficient, Ymin
 
No CNB round robin data are available at this time. 

*, for the CNB test method is a maximum of 1 %.  

In  ASTM  C1421,  it  is  estimated  that  the  type 

1 

: 

SRM 2100a 

 

Page 10 of 10 

