bot 
U.  S.  Departmentof  Commerce 
alcoln#  Baldrige 
peceplary 
  

National  Bureaw 
of  Standards 
Ernest  ‘Ambler.  Director 
eet  ee 
ae 

  

ant  of  Standards 

Wertificate 

Standard  Reference  Material  2152 

Urea 

Combustion  Calorimetric  Standard 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  consists  of  twenty-five  grams  of  commercially  prepared  high-purity  urea. 
SRM  2152  is  intended  for  use  in  checking  the  suitability  of  apparatus,  analytical  procedures,  and  calculations  involved  in 
oxygen-bomb  calorimetry  of  substances  containing  more  than  15  weight-percent  nitrogen. 
The  certified  value  for  the  quantity  of  heat  evolved  by  combustion  of  a  sample  of  this  material  in  an  oxygen-bomb 
calorimeter  is: 

10.536  +  0.003  MJ/kg. 

The  uncertainty  of  the  certified  value  is  two  standard  deviations  of  the  mean. 

The  certified  value  is  for  the  following  reaction  at  25  °C. 

CH,4ON2(c)  +  1.5  O2(g)  —» 

COr(g)  +  No(g)  +  2  H2O(liq). 

Bomb  Conditions: 
(1)  The  SRM  must  be  crushed  to  a  powder  and  dried  for  24  hours  at  85°C:  It  may  be  stored  at  room  temperature  ina 

closed  container.  The  dried  material  must  be  pressed  into  a  pellet  before  placing  in  the  bomb. 

(2)  The  mass  of  sample,  in  grams,  is  equal  to  7  times  the  volume  of  the  bomb  in  liters. 
(3)  The  mass  of  benzoic  acid,  used  as  an  auxiliary  for  ignition,  is  2.0  percent  of  the  mass  of  sample. 
(4)  The  mass  of  water  in  grams,  initially  placed  in  the  bomb,  is  equal  to  30  times  the  volume  of  the  bomb  in  liters. 
(5)  The  pelletized  material  is  burned  in  a  bomb  of  constant  volume  filled  with  pure  oxygen  at  a  pressure  of  30 

atmospheres  measured  at  25  °C. 

Recommended  Procedures: 

(1)  The  ignition  energy  must  be  determined  in  a  separate  experiment. 
(2)  The  quantity  of  nitric  acid  produced  in  the  combustion  is  determined  by  titration  of  the  bomb  solution  with  standard 
alkali.  The  energy  of  decomposition  of  nitric  acid  into  nitrogen  (gas)  and  water  (liquid)  was  taken  as  59kJ/mol.  The 
energy  contributed  by  combustion  of  benzoic  acid  was  taken  as  26.434  MJ/kg. 

(3)  The  energy  evolved  by  the  actual  bomb  process,  AUs,  must  be  corrected  to  that  for  the  ideal  process,  AUé,  by  the 
method  of  Prosen  [1],Hubbard,  Scott,  and  Waddington  [2],  or  M2nsson  and  Hubbard  [3].  For  further  information 
regarding  procedures  in  the  calibration  of  combustion  bomb  calorimeters,  the  discussions  by  Coops,  Jessup,  and 
Van  Nes  [4]  and  Mosselman  and  Churney  [5]  should  be  consulted. 

The  measurements  were  performed  and  analyzed  in  the  Thermochemical  Measurements  and  Standards  Section  by 
W.H.  Johnson,  under  the  technical  direction  of  G.T.  Armstrong. 
The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  Standard  Reference 
Material  were  coordinated  through  the  Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials  by  L.J.  Kieffer  and  T.W.  Mears. 

January  14,  1985 
Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 

  
  

{over}

  

Stanley  D.  Rasberry,  Chief 
Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials 

References 

[1]  Prosen,  E.J.,  Chapter  5,  Experimental  Thermochemistry,  F.D.  Rossini,  Editor,  (Interscience  Publishers,  Inc.,  New 

York,  1956). 

[2]  Hubbard,  W.N.,  Scott,  D.W.,  and  Waddington,  G.,  J.  Phys.  Chem.  38,  152  (1954). 

.  [3]  Mansson,  M.,  and  Hubbard,  W.N.,  Chapter  5,  Combustion  Calorimetry,  S.  Sunner  and  M.  Mansson,  Editors, 

(Pergamon  Press,  New  York,  1979}. 

[4]  Coops,  J.,  Jessup,  R.S.,  and  Van  Nes,  K.,  Chapter  3,  Experimental  Thermochemistry,  F.D.  Rossini,  Editor, 

(Interscience  Publishers,  Inc.,  New  York,  1956). 

[5]  Mosselman,  C.,  and  Churney,  K.L.,  Chapter  3,  Combustion  Calorimetry,  S.  Sunner  and  M.  Mansson,  Editors, 

(Pergamon  Press,  New  York,  1979).

