U.S.  Depart  Commerce 
MalcolneBaldrige 

     [Standards 

  
Director 

. 

  

National  Bureau  of  Standards 

Cortificate 

Standard  Reference  Material  2220 

Temperature  and  Enthalpy  of  Fusion  § 

-—  Tin 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  consists  of  high  purity  (99.9995  percent)  tin  foil.  SRM  2220  is  intended  for 
use  in  calibrating  differential  scanning  calorimeters,  differential  thermal  analyzers,  and  similar  instruments. 

The  temperature  and  enthalpy  of  fusion  for  SRM  2220  were  measured  by  differential  scanning  calorimetry.  The  experi- 
mental  procedure  followed  the  American  Society  for  Testing  and  Materials  (ASTM)  recommended  practices  [1,  2]. 
The  documentation  for  these  procedures  is  given  in  NBS  Special  Publication  260-99. 

Certified  Values: 

*Heating  rate  of  2.5  K/min 

Melting  Temperature* 

Enthalpy  of  Fusion 

505.08  +  0.39  K 

56.57  £0.10  J/g 

The  certified  values  are  averages  of  measurements  on  twenty  one  specimens  taken  from  nine  different  samples  of  the 
material.  The  listed  uncertainties  are  three  times  the  estimated  standard  error  of the  certified  values.  These  uncertainties 
include  contributions  to  variability  from  instrumental  factors,  operating  procedures,  and  effects  of  remounting  the 
specimens. 

  

Material  Specification:  SRM  2220  is  made  from  tin  foil  (2.5  cm  wide  x  609.6  cm  long  x  0.127  mm  thick).  The  SRM 
consists  of  a  25.5  mm  square  of  the  tin  foil  from  which  specimens  can  be  cut  easily.  The  SRM  unit  supplied  will  provide 
approximately  sixty-four  8  mg  test  specimens. 

The  measurements  were  performed  by  S.A.  Sullivan  and  J.E.  Callanan  under  the  technical  direction  of  J.E.  Callanan, 
both  of  the  NBS  Chemical  Engineering  Sciences  Division. 

Consultation  on  the  statistical  design  of  the  experimental  work  and  statistical  analysis  of  the  data  was  provided  by 
D.F.  Vecchia  of  the  NBS  Statistical  Engineering  Division. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  Standard  Reference 
Material  were  coordinated  through  the  Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials  by  L.J.  Kieffer. 

References: 

analyzers  E967. 

1.  ASTM  Standard  Practice  for  temperature  calibration  of  differential  scanning  calorimeters  and  differential  thermal 

2.  ASTM  Standard  Practice  for  heat  flow  calibration  of  differential  scanning  calorimeters  E968. 

Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 
November  15,  1985 

Stanley  D.  Rasberry,  Chief 
Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials

