er  National  Inatitute  of  Standaris  &  Cechnolagy 

   

  

Qertificate  of  Analysts 

Standard  Reference  Material  2291 

Ethyl-t-butyl  Ether  in  Reference  Gasoline 
(Nominal  2.7  Weight  Percent  Oxygen) 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  as  a  primary  standard  for  the  calibration  of 
It  consists  of  a  solution  of  ethyl-t 
instruments  used  for  the  determination  of  the  ongzen  content  of  motor  fuels. 
butyl  ether  (Chenucal  Abstracts  Service  (CAS)  Registry  Number  637-92-3)  in  a  reference  gasoline 
Certified 
concentrtions  are  provided  for  ethyl-t-butyl  ether  and  oxygen.  A  unit  of  SRM  2291  consists  of  tro  20  mL 
ampowes  of  the  ethyl-t-butyl  ether  in  reference  gasoline  solution,  each  containing  approximately  18  mL,  and  one 
20  mL  ampoule  containing  approximately  18  mL  of  the  reference  gasoline,  intencled  for  use  as 
a  measurement 
blank. 

Certified  Concentrations:  The  certified  concenttations  and  estimated  uncertainties  for  ethylt-bubyl  ether  and 
oxygen  are  grven  below.  These  concentrations  are  based  on  results  obtained  from  the  gravimetric  preparation  of 
the  solution  of  etbyl-t-utyl  ether  in  gasoline  and  from  the  anabjtical  results  determined  using  gas  chromatography, 
corrected  for  impurities. 

Component 

ify  baal  Rifer 
Oxygen 

Vt  So 
(2/100  g  Solution) 

AIG  +  WTF 
2.70  £6,  ted 

Uncertainty:  The  uncertainty  of  each  value  on  this  document  is  the  numerical  value  of  an  expanded  uncertainty 
U=  kus,  with  U  determined  from  a  combined  standard  uncertainty u.  and  a  coverage  factor, 
k=  2.  The  expanded 
uticerteinty  defines  arenge  of values  for  the  certified  value  within  which  the  true  value  is  believed  to  lie,  at  a  level 
of  confidence  of  95%% 

[1]. 

SGN  RIOR  A 

0)  BCAA  PPL  AY 

Havadlinew  and  Storage:  Provide  locel  exhaust  or  general  dilution  ventilation  to  meet  published  exposure  limits. 
Thoge  handling  gasoline  should  weer  appropriate  clothing  and  cloves  to  prevent  skin  contact  with  this  material  and 
splash-proof  or  dust  resistent  safety  goggles  to  prevent  eye  contact.  Store  ina  cool  dry,  end  well-ventilated  area 
awey  from  incompatible  materials  and  prevent  contact  with  heat  sparks  or  open  flame. 
Protect  ampoules  from 
physical  damage.  Please  read  the MSDS  for  this  material  before  use. 

  

Anebytical  determinations  were  performed  ty  3.N.  Chester  and  T.L.  Green  of  the  NIST  Anabrtical  Chemistry 
Division.  The  coortination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  certification  was  under  the  direction  of  5.N 
Chesler  and  FR.  Guenther  of  the  NIST  Anabytical  Chenustry  Division.  Data  analysis  was  provided  by  D.  Duewer 
of  the  NIST  Analytical  Chemistry  Drvision  and  reviewed  by  EK.  Eberhart  of  the  NIST  Statistical  Engineering 
Division. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  SRM  were 
coordinated  through  the  Standard  Reference  Materials  Program 

by  TE.  Gills  and  J.5.  Kane. 

Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 
January  25,  1995 

Thomas  E.  Gills,  Chief 
stendard  Reference  Matenals  Program

  

Expiration  of  Certification:  The  certified  valies  are  valid,  within  the  limits  specified,  for  5  years  from  the  date 
of  shipment  from  NIST.  In  the  event  that  the  certification  should  become  invalid  before  then,  purchasers  will  be 
notified  by  NIST.  Please  retum  the  attached  registration  card  to  facilitate  notification. 

Use:  Sample  aliquots  for  analysis  should be  withdrawn  at  20  to  25  °C  immediately  after  opening  the  ampoules  and 
should be  processed  without  delay  for  the  certified  values  to  be  valid  within  the  stated  uncertainty.  Because  of  the 
volatility  of  some  of  the  components  in  the  reference  gasoline,  certified  values  are  not  applicable  to  material 
stored  in  ampoules  that  hare  been  opened  for  more  then  4  min,  even  if  they  are  resealed. 

This  SRM  was  prepared  by  G.  Lew  of  Scott  Specialty  Gases  Inc.  at 
Preparation  and  Gravimetric  Anaipsis: 
scott's  facilities  in  Houston,  TX. 
All  chemicals  used  in  the  preparation  of  this  matenal  were  obtained  from 
commercial  sources.  The  reference  gasoline  was  obtained  from  Phillips  Petroleum,  Bartlesville,  OF  and  was 
identified  as  RF-A.  HPLC  Grade  ethayl-t-butyl  ether  was  obtained  from  Aldrich  Chemical  Co.,  Milwaukee, WIT. 

This  SRM  was  prepared  by  additive  weighing  of  the  RF-A  gasoline  ancl  ethyl-t-hutyl  ether.  After  preparation  and 
homogenization,  the  solution was  aliquoted  into  20  mL  glass  ampoules  which  were  subsequently  flame  sealed.  The 
gravimetrically  determined  concentration  of  ethyl-t-butyl  ether  in  the  SRM  sofation  was  (17.59  40.0%  gf/l00  ¢ 
solution. 

Gas  Chromatographie  Anabysis:  The  concentration  of  the  ethylt-hutyl  ether  in  the  SEM  solution  was  determined 
by  capillary  column  gas  chromatogrephy 
using  flame  iormzeation  detection  (GC-FID).  Anahysis  was  based  upon  the 
tatio  of  the  elution  peak  area  of  ethal-t-butyl  ether  and  that  of  a  gasoline  component.  The  gasoline  component 
selected  had  a  large,  well-  resolved  peak  with  a  similar  retention  time  to  ethyl-t-butyl  ether.  Ethyl-t-butyl  ether 
solution  concentration  was  calculated  from  a  calibration  curve  constructed  from  peak  area  ratios  for  unmodified 
RFA  gasoline  blank  and  NIST  gravimetrically  prepared  standards.  This  concentration  of  ethyl-t-butyl  ether  in  the 
ARM  solstion  was  (17.59  £0.12)  gf100  g  solution. 

The  organic  purity  of  the  ethyl-t-butyl  ether  was  also  determined  using  GC-FID.  Baseclon  12  replicate  analyses,  it 
wes  determinedtobe  @7.78  £0.13)%. 

The  water  concentration  of  the  SRM  solution  was  determined  by  capillary  column  gas  chromatography  using 
atomic  emission  detection  (GC-AED)  in  oxngen-specific  mode  (GC-AED).  Based  on  3  replicate  analyses,  it  was 
determined to  be  (0.01  +  0.015  2/100  ¢  SRM  solution.  The  concentration  of  oxygen  from  trace  organic  impurities 
wes  also  determuned  using GC-AED.  No  significant  oxygen-containing  impunties  other  than  water  were  found  in 
this  SRM 

The  ethyl-t-tutyl  ether  content  in  the  SRM  solution  was  calculated  from  the  consensus  concentration  of  ethyl-t 
butyl  ether  in  the  SRM  solution,  with  corrections  for  both  water  end  organic  purity.  The  molecular  oxygen  content 
in  the  SRM  was 
ether  concentmtion  and  water 
concentration. 

calculated  from  the  sum  of  the 

corrected  ethyl-t-tutyl 

REFERENCE 

"Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in  Measurement’,  ISBM  92-67-10128-9  Ist  Ed.  IS0,  Geneva 

[1] 
switzerland, 

(1993).

