National  Inattinte  of  Stantarits  &  Technology 

Gertificate  of  Analysis 

Standard  Reference  Material  2293 

Methyl-t-butyl  Ether  in  Reference  Gasoline 
(Normunal  2.7  Weight  Percent  Oxygen) 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  as  a  primary  standard  for  the  calibration  of 
instruments  used  for  the  detertunation  of  the  on7gzen  content  of  motor  fuels.  It  consists  of  a  solution  of  methyl 
t-butyl  ether  (Chemical  Abstracts  Service  (C45)  Registry  Number  1634-044)  in  a  reference  gasoline.  Certified 
concentrations  are  provided  for  methyyl-t-butyl  ether  and  oxygen.  A  unit  of  SRM  2293  consists  of  two  20  mL 
ampoules  of  the  methyl-t-butyl  ether  in  reference  gasoline  solution,  each  conteimng  approximately  18  mL,  and 
one  20  mL  ampoule  contaming  approximately  18  mL  of  the  reference  gasoline,  intended  foruse  as  a  measurement 
blank. 

Certified  Concentrations:  The  certified  concentrations  and  estimated  uncertainties  for  methyl-t-butyl  ether  and 
oxygen  are  grven  below.  These  concentrations  are  based  on  results  obtained  from  the  gravimetric  preparation  of 
the  solution  of  methylt-butyl  ether  in  gasoline 
results  determined  using  gas 
chromatography,  corrected  for  impurities. 

and  from  the 

analytical 

Component 

Methrgl-t-butyl  Ether 
Oxygen 

Vt 
(2/100  g  Solution) 

14246  +  0.20 
2.71  40.04 

Uncertainty:  The  uncertainty  of  each  vabie  in  this  document  is  the  mumerical  value  of  an  expanded  uncertainty  U= 
ku,  with  U  determined  from  a  combined  standard  uncertainty  uw,  and  a  covemge  factor, 
The  expanded 
uticerteinty  defines  arenge  of values  for  the  certified  value  within  which  the  true  value  is  believed  to  lie,  at  a  level 
of  confidence  of  95%% 

[1]. 

2. 

k= 

GGNR  IORI)  BAG  PPL  RY 

Handing  and  Sorage:  Provide  locel  exhaust  or  general  dilution  ventilation  to  meet  published  exposure  limits. 
Those  handling  gasoline  should  weer  appropriate  clothing  and  gloves  to  prevent  skin  contact  with  this  material  and 
splash-proof  or  dust  resistant  safety  goggles  to  prevent  eye  contact.  Store  in  a  cool  dry,  and  well-vertiated  area 
awey  from  incompatible  materials  and  prevent  contact  with  heat  sparks  or  open  flame. 
Protect  ampoules  from 
physical  damage.  Please  read  the MSDS  for  this  material  hefore  use. 

  

Anebytical  determinations  were  performed  by  5.H.  Chesler  and  T.L.  Green  of  the  NIST  Analytical  Chemistry 
Division.  The  coortination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  certification  was  under  the  direction  of  5.N. 
Chesler  and  FR.  Guenther  of  the  NIST  Analytical  Chenustry  Division.  Data  analysis  was  provided  by  D.  Duewer 
of  the  NIST  Analytical  Chemistry  Division  and  reviewed  by  EK.  Eberhart  of  the  NIST  Statistical  Engineering 
Division. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involred  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  SRM  were 
coordinated  through  the  Standard  Reference  Materials  Program by  TE.  Gills  and  JS.  Kane. 

Gaithershurg,  MD  20899 
February  2,  1995 

Thomas  E.  Gills,  Chief 
ntandard  Reference  Materials  Program 

(over)

  

Expiration  of  Ceriification.  The  certified  values  are  valid,  within  the  limits  specified,  for  3  years  from  the  date  of 
shipment  from  NIST.  In  the  event  that  the  certification  should  become  irrvalid  before  then,  purchasers  will  be 
notified  ty  NIST.  Please  retum  the  attached  registration  card  to  facilitate  notification. 

Use:  Sample  aliquots  for  analysis  should be  withdrawn  at  20  to  25°C  immediately  after  opening  the  ampoules  and 
should be  processed  without  delay  for  the  certified  values  to  be  valid  within  the  stated  uncertainty.  Because  of  the 
volatility  of  some  of  the  components  in  the  reference  gasoline,  certified  values  are  not  applicable  to  material 
stored  in  ampoules  that  have  been  opened  for  more  than  5  min,  even  if  they  are  resealed. 

This  SRM  was  prepared  by  G.  Lew  of  Scott  Specialty  Gases  Inc.  at 
Preporation  and  Gravimetric  Anaipsis: 
scott's  facilities  in  Houston,  TA. 
All  chemucels  used  in  the  preparation  of  this  material  were  obtained  from 
commercial  sources.  The  reference  gasoline  was  obtained  from  Phillips  Petroleum,  Bartlerville,  CK  and  was 
identified  as  RF-A.  HPLC  Grade  mettorl-t-butal  ether  was  obtained  from  Aldrich  Chemical  Co.,  Milwaukee,  WT. 

This  SRM  was  prepared by  additive  weighing  of  the  RFA  pasoline  and  methyltbutyl  ether.  After  preparation  and 
homogenization,  the  solution was  aliquoted  mto  20  mL  glass  ampoules  which  were  subsequently  flame  sealed.  The 
gravimetrically  determined  concentemtion  of  methyl-t-butyl  ether  in  the  SRM  solution  was  (14.904  0.02)  a/100  g 
solution. 

The  concentration  of  the  methyl-t-butyl  ether 

Gas  Chromatographic  Anebsis: 
in  the  SRM  solution  wes 
determined by  capillary  column  ges  chromatography  using  flame  ionization  detection  (GC-FID).  Analysis  was 
based  upon  the  ratio  of  the  elution  peak  area  of  methyl-t-butyl  ether  and  thet  of  «  gasoline  component. 
The 
gasoline  component  selected had  a  largesrell-resolved  peak  with  a  similar  retention  tame  to  methyltbutyl  ether. 
Methyl-t-butyl  ether  solution  concentration  was  calculated  from  a  calibration  curve  constructed  from  peak  area 
ratios  for  unmodified  RF-A  gasoline  blank  and  NIST  gravimetrically  prepared  standards. 
This  concentration  of 
methyl-t-butyl  ether  in  the  SRM  sohition  was  (14.84+0.12  2/100  ¢  solution. 

The  otgeric  purity  of  the  methyl-t-outyl  ether  was  also  determinedusing  GC-FID.  Based  on  12  replicate  analyses, 
it  was  determined  to  be  G9  96  +  0.04)%5 

The  water  concentration  of  the  SRM  solution  was  determined  by  capillary  column  gas  chromeatogrphy  using 
atomic  emission  detection  (GC-AED)  in  oxyrgen-specific  mode.  Based  on  4  replicate  analyses,  it  was  determined 
to  be  (0.02  +  0.01)  g/100  g  SRM  solution.  The  concentration  of  oxygen  from  trace  organic  impurities  was  also 
determined  using GC-AED.  No  significant  oygen-comtaning  impurities  other  then  water  were  found  inthis  SRM. 

The  methyl-t-butyl  ether  content  inthe  SRM  solution wes  calculated  from  the  consensus  concentration  of  methyl 
t-butyl  ether  in  the  SRM  solution,  with  corrections  for  both  weter  and  organic  purity.  The  molecular  oxrgen 
content  in  the  SRM  wes  calculated  from  the  sum  of  the  corrected  methyl-t-butyl  ether  concentrtion  end  water 
concentration. 

REFERENCE 

"Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in  Measurement’,  ISBN  92-67-10188-9  Ist  Ed.  IS0,  Geneva 

[1] 
switzerland, 

(1993).

