 

NUT 

Date of Issue: 
ch  2018 
13 March 2018 
 

Standard Reference Material 2372a 
Human DNA Quantitation Standard 
CERTIFICATE OF ANALYSIS 

 

 

 

ssignment  of  human  genomic 
Purpose:  This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended for use in the value assignment of human genomic 
iolymerase  chain  reaction 
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) quantitation materials, primarily those used for quantitative polymerase chain reaction 
(qPCR). 
 
Description:  A unit of SRM 2372a consists of three well-characterized human genomic DNA materials in pH 8.0 
aqueous buffer.  The components are derived from human buffy coat samples and labeled A, B, and C.  Component 
A consists of genomic DNA from a single male donor.  Component B consists of genomic DNA from a single female 
donor.  Component C consists of a gravimetric mixture of genomic DNA (1 part male donor to 3 parts female donor).  
A unit of the SRM consists of one sterile 0.5 mL vial of each component, each vial containing approximately 55 µL 
of DNA solution.  Each of these vials is labeled and is sealed with a color-coded screw cap. 
 
Certified Values:  Certified values are provided in Table 1.  These certified values were determined based on droplet 
dilution  factors, 
digital polymerase chain reaction (ddPCR) assay counts of ten unique targets on eight chromosomes, dilution factors, 
st  confidence  in 
and droplet volume measurements.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in 
that all known or suspected sources of bias have been accounted for.   
 

vided  in  Table 

oncentration  for  SRM 

Table 1.  Certified Values of Number and Mass Concentration for SRM 2372a(a) 
The  copy  number  values  are  metrologically  traceable  to  the  natural  units  count  1  and  ratio  1  and 
International System of Units (SI) derived units of volume.  The DNA mass concentration values are 
metrologically traceable to the natural units count and ratio 1 and SI derived units of mass and volume. 
Copy Number(b) 
(per nL) 
  
A (red cap) 
15.1  ±  1.5 
B (white cap) 
17.5  ±  1.8 
C (blue cap) 
14.5  ±  1.5 

49.8  ±  5.0 
57.8  ±  5.8 
47.9  ±  4.8 

DNA(c) 
(ng/µL) 

Component 

 
 
 

 
 
 

(a) Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the certified value and U95%(x) is the expanded uncertainty of the certified value.  
The  true  value  of  the  analyte  is  believed  to  lie  within  the  interval  x ± U95%(x)  with  95 %  confidence.    To  propagate  this 
uncertainty, treat the certified value as a normally distributed random variable with mean x and standard deviation U95%(x)/2. 
(b) Copy  number  concentration  values,  human  haploid  genome  equivalents  (HHGE)  per  nanoliter,  are  based  on  droplet  digital 

human 

U 

x 

(ddPCR) assay counts of ten unique targets on eight chromosomes, dilution factors, and droplet volume measurements. 

(c) Mass concentration values, nanograms of human genomic DNA per microliter, are calculated from the number concentration 
concentration
results, the number of nucleotide base pairs (bp) in the reference HHGE, and the mean molecular weight of the sodium salts of 
the nucleotide monomers that comprise the DNA polymer. 

 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2372a is valid, within the stated measurement uncertainty, 
until 13 February 2023, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with the instructions given in this 
certificate  (see  “Storage  and  Handling”).    The  certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is  damaged,  contaminated,  or 
otherwise modified. 
 
 
 
 
 
Michael J. Tarlov, Chief 
Biomolecular Measurement Division  

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

SRM 2372a 

 

Page 1 of 2 

 

 

 

Non-Certified Values:  Table 2 lists values for the number of mitochondrial genomes (mtDNA) relative to the number 
of nuclear haploid genomes (nDNA) present in the SRM 2372a components.  Because they are based on a limited 
number  of  independent  ddPCR  assays,  these  values  do  not  meet  NIST’s  criteria  for  certification  but  are  the  best 
currently available estimates. 
 

Table 2.  Assay-Specific mtDNA/nDNA Ratios(a) 
These values are metrologically traceable to the ddPCR measurement method and assays used. 

say 

Component 

mtDNA/nDNA 

 
A (red cap) 
 
B (white cap) 
 
C (blue cap) 
 

174  ±  4 
206  ±  5 
279  ±  7 

(a) Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the best-estimate value and U95%(x) is its expanded uncertainty.  The true value 
of the ratio is believed to lie within the interval x ± U95%(x) with 95 % confidence.  To propagate this uncertainty, treat the value 
as a normally distributed random variable with mean x and standard deviation U95%(x)/2. 

 
 
Storage and Handling:  Until required for use, SRM 2372a should be stored in the dark between 2 °C and 8 °C.  
Component vials should be mixed briefly and centrifuged (without opening the vial cap) prior to removing sample 
aliquots  for  analysis.    For  the  certified  values  to  be  applicable,  materials  should  be  withdrawn  immediately  after 
opening the vials and processed without delay.  Certified values do not apply to any material remaining in recapped 
vials.  The certification only applies to the initial use and the same results are not guaranteed if the remaining material 
is used at a later date. 
 
Use: For qPCR assays, value assign secondary standard DNA solutions relative to the certified mass concentrations. 
Calibrate the assays to SRM 2372a using one or more dilution series prepared from a SRM 2372a component. For 
non-gender-specific  qPCR  assays,  all  three  components  should  be  used  as  calibrants  to  elucidate  potential 
material-assay specific interactions. Users should keep in mind that a potential for pipetting error exists; therefore, 
suitable care should be exercised in preparing calibration solutions. 
 
Safety:  Each donor unit used in the preparation of this product was tested by FDA-licensed tests and found to be 
negative for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1 RNA and Anti-HIV 1/2), hepatitis B (HBV DNA and HBsAg), 
hepatitis C (HCV RNA and Anti-HCV), West Nile virus (WNV RNA) and syphilis.  Additionally, each donor was 
tested according to FDA guidelines for Trypanosoma cruzi (Chagas) and found to be negative/non-reactive.  However, 
no known test method can offer complete assurance that infectious agents are absent from this material.  Accordingly, 
this human blood-based product should be handled at the Biosafety Level 1.  SRM 2372a components and derived 
solutions should be disposed of in accordance with local, state, and federal regulations. 
 
Source:  This SRM was developed after an appropriate human subjects research determination by NIST. 
 
Additional  Information:    Full  details  on  the  production,  analysis,  and  statistical  evaluation  of  SRM 2372a  are 
provided in:  NIST Special Publication 260-189, Certification of Standard Reference Material® 2372a Human DNA 
Quantitation Standard.  This publication is available free of charge at https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.260-189.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  until  its  certification  expires.    If  substantive  technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the 
certified values before this certificate expires, NIST will notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or 
register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Users of this SRM should ensure that the Certificate of Analysis in their possession is current.  Contact the Office of 
Reference Materials 100 Bureau Drive, Stop 2300, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899-2300; telephone (301) 975-2200; 
fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or the internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 2372a 

 

Page 2 of 2 

