National Institute of Standards and Technology 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 2520 

Optical Fiber Diameter Standard 

Serial No.   

 
 
 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended for calibrating video microscopes or gray-scale systems used for 
fiber geometry measurements.  Each SRM is individually calibrated and bears a serial number.  The SRM consists of a 
short length of bare fiber in an aluminum housing.  The end of each specimen has been carefully cleaved so that damage 
is minimal and the end is within approximately one-half wavelength of perpendicularity to the axis of the fiber. Also 
supplied for convenience is a 1-2 m pigtail that may be used for exciting the core of the fiber. 
 

Table 1.  Certified Diameters 

Angle, in ° 

Diameter, in μm 

Uncertainty, in nm (3σ) 

 0 

 45 

 90 

 135 

 mean 

 

 

 

± 

± 

± 

 

 

± 

± 

42 

42 

42 

42 

37 

 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification is valid indefinitely provided that the instructions for proper care and 
handling of the fiber have been adhered to and that the end face shows no sign of contamination, damage, or aging. 
 
Housings were produced by Larsen Engineering, Boulder, CO and are based on a design provided by Photon Kinetics, 
Beaverton, OR.  Fiber was contributed by Corning Inc., Optoelectronics Group, Corning, NY.  Specimens were 
assembled by T. Drapela and S.E. Mechels of the NIST Optoelectronics Division. 
 
The technical direction and physical measurements leading to certification were provided by M.Young with assistance 
from S.E. Mechels, P.D. Hale, T. Drapela, and D.L. Franzen of the NIST Optoelectronics Division. 
 
Assistance with statistical analysis was provided by R.M. Judish of the NIST Electromagnetic Fields Division. 
 
The technical and support aspects involved in the preparation, certification, and issuance of this SRM were coordinated 
through the Standard Reference Materials Program by N.M. Trahey and R.J. Gettings. 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
May 24, 2007 
(Revision of certificate dated 1-25-93) 

Thomas E. Gills, Chief 
Standard Reference Materials Program 

 

 

 

 
 

Page 1 of 4 

nd minor axes of the fiber.  Provided that the fiber is 

Description of SRM:  The specimen in the aluminum housing is a single-mode fiber that has been chosen especially to 
minimize noncircularity and fluctuations of diameter with length. The aluminum housing is marked so that the fiber may 
be held at several different angular orientations.  Four diameters have been measured with a contact micrometer: these 
values, in addition to their mean, may be useful for calibrating a gray-scale system. 
 
Determination of Optical Fiber Diameter:   The diameter of the bare, cleaved end of the fiber has been measured 
approximately l mm from the end with a contact micrometer.  Diameters have been measured at angles of 0°, 45°, 90°, 
and 135°, where the angles are defined in the instructions be low.  These four diameters and their mean are given in 
Table l.  The noncircularity of the fiber may be estimated as  the ratio of the largest diameter to the smallest diameter, 
minus l.  No attempt has been made to locate the major a
approximately elliptical in cross section, the noncircularity estimated in this way is low by 0 % to 40 %, in addition to the 
uncertainty of measurement of the individual diameters.  This SRM is not certified for noncircularity. 
 
Discussion of Uncertainties:  Uncertainties were calculated according to the procedures outlined in Ref. [1].  Measured 
(Type A) uncertainties were assumed to be Gaussian-distributed, whereas estimated or inferred (Type B) uncertainties 
were assumed to be described by a rectangular probability distribution function.  The uncertainties were combined by 
adding their variances in quadrature, where the variance of a rectangular distribution is one-third the square of its half-
width.  Table 2 is a list of all the sources of uncertainty that could be identified.  In (a), the measured standard deviations 
are listed, whereas in (b), the half-widths of the estimated uncertainties are listed.    
 
Instructions for Use:  Place the fiber housing in the set to be tested, with the magnetic stainless steel cover facing down. 
The front is the end from which the cleaved fiber end is pushed out; the rear is the end from which the brass barrel and 
fiber pigtail stick out.  A line is scribed at the rear of the housing.  The brass barrel has lines scribed on it at 45° intervals. 
 There is a flat machined on the barrel.  The fiber is define d to be in the 0° position when the line scribed on this flat 
aligns with the line on the rear of the housing.  A 0° diameter measurement is defined to be a horizontal measurement 
when the fiber is in the 0° position.  The 0° diameter, therefore, is measured in a plane parallel to the flat on the barrel.  
(These instructions assume that the user’s gray-scale system is horizontal and that the image on the video screen is not 
inverted.  If these conditions are not satisfied, the user may have to modify the angles accordingly.)   
 
Place the housing in the gray-scale system with the flat on th e barrel horizontal and facing upward, that is, in the 0° 
position.  Micrometer measurements have been made at 0°, 45°, 90°, and 135°; that is, the fiber was rotated clockwise by 
those angles, as seen from the rear.  Thus, with respect to the image on the monitor, the 0° diameter is horizontal and 90° 
diameter is vertical.  The 45° diameter passes through the second and fourth quadrants, whereas the 135° diameter passes 
through the first and third quadrants.  If a comparison of the NIST measurements of those four diameters with the edge 
table is desired, the fiber should be placed into the system in the 0° position.  If the mean value of the four NIST diameter 
measurements is to be compared with the mean diameter, the specimen may be oriented in the system at any angle.  
 
When ready to perform a measurement with the SRM, take the following steps to extend the fiber end from the housing: 
 
Remove the housing and the pigtailed fiber from the recess in the SRM container.  Remove the socket-head screw from 
the side of the housing.  When in place, this screw keeps the barrel from moving forward, keeping the fiber retracted in 
the housing.  This screw is just “finger-tight,” simply unscrew it by hand.  The barrel will now be able to move forward 
against slight resistance from the alignment spring.  To  extend the fiber end, push the barrel forward with a steady 
forward force.  Be careful not to apply strong side forces while pushing or pulling the barrel, since the barrel could be 
forced out of its alignment and cause the fiber to hit the end of the housing or touch the side of the hole and break. 
 
Following the instructions of the instrument manufacturer, insert the housing into the test set.  It may be safest to have the 
fiber retracted when inserting the housing into the test set.  Make sure that nothing is within l cm (0.4 in) of the front of 
the housing; then extend the fiber carefully.  It will stick out roughly 0.57 cm (0.22 in) when fully extended. 
 
Now rotate the barrel until the fiber is oriented at 0° (or  at the desired angle), as defined above.  While handling the 
barrel end, be careful not to bump or catch the exposed fiber pigtail.  Secure the pigtail in a safe manner. 

 
 

Page 2 of 4 

 
When launching light down the fiber, as with the gray-scale method, cleave the pigtailed end (opposite to the calibrated 
end).  Cut away and strip as little fiber as possible, in order  to ensure that there will be fiber left for future cleaving. 
Alternatively, it may be desirable to terminate the end of the pigtail with a connector. 
 
Routine cleaning of the calibrated end of the fiber is not recommended.  Rather, do the work in a clean environment and 
do not expose the fiber end more than necessary.  If, however, the end becomes contaminated, clean it with an ultrasonic 
cleaner.  This is the only method that is recommended for cleaning the calibrated end.  Use either spectroscopic grade 
ethanol or acetone, preferably not reagent grade.  Acetone may clean more stubborn contaminants.  In either case, make 
sure that the fluid is fresh and clean.  Then extend the fiber from the housing and dip it into the ultrasonic cleaning liquid 
for no more than a few seconds.  Be careful not to bump the fiber end against the walls or floor of the cleaner.  Do not 
immerse the housing itself in the fluid. 
 
For calibrating the gray-scale system, simply follow the normal procedure and measure the diameter of the calibrated 
fiber.  Calculate the mean value given on the certificate minus the measured value.  This is the additive correction.  Add 
the additive correction algebraically to the measured diameters to get the true diameters of the measured fibers.  This 
procedure is most accurate for fibers that have nearly the 
same diameter as the calibrated fiber.  Because of linear 
distortion or other factors in the gray-scale system, the additive correction may be less accurate if it is applied to fibers 
whose diameters differ greatly from the diameter of the calibrated fiber. 
 
Storage and Handling:  To store the fiber and housing, retract the fiber into the housing and replace the socket head 
screw into the side of the housing.  Replace the housing into the recessed shipping container and screw the plastic top 
down.  Store the entire assembly in a clean environment or put it into an airtight plastic bag.  Do not expose the calibrated 
end or the housing more than is necessary.  

 
 

Page 3 of 4 

 

 
 

 
 

Table 2.  Tabulation of Uncertaintiesa 

Source of Uncertainty 

Criterion 

Uncertainty, 
in nm 

(a) Measured Uncertainties 

Noise 

Calculated standard deviation 

Correction for deformation [2] 

Standard deviation of calculated slope 

(b) Inferred Uncertainties 

Correction for deformation [2] 

Error of force equivalent to ½ g 

Surface roughness 

Burr on anvil 

± ½  of correction 

Control chart 

Deformation or taper 

Stress analysis & interference microscope 

Cosine 0.2° 

Abbe offset 

Wavelength Fluorescence 

Index of refraction of air 
under average conditions  
Variation of 
Barometric pressure 
Variation of 
Ambient temperature 
Variation of 
Relative humidity 

Combined uncertainty 

EXPANDED UNCERTAINTY 

1 μrad (0.2") x 2 mm offset 

linewidth 

Uncertainty of calculation 

± 4 kPa 

± 5 K 

± 50 % 

1σ  

3σ  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

3 

10 

8 

10 

10 

0.8 

2 

0.3 

<0.1 

1.25 

0.5 

<0.1 

14 

42 

 
a Measured uncertainties are qualified as 1 standard deviation of the mean; inferred uncertainties are the estimated half-
width of a rectangular distribution. 
 
 REFERENCES 
 
[1]  Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement, ISBN 92-67-10188-9, lst Ed. ISO,  Geneva, Switzerland, 

(1993). 

[2]  Young, M., Mechels, S.E., and Hale, P.D., “Optical

 Fiber Geometry:  Accurate Measurement of Cladding 

Diameter,” J. Res. Nat. Inst. Stands. Tech., Vol. 98, No. 2, pp. 203-216, (1993). 

Page 4 of 4 

