 

oor 
Ne  g- 

Srares  oe

 

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 2589 

 
Powdered Paint 
(Nominal 10 % Lead) 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended for use in the evaluation of methods and for the calibration of 
apparatus used to determine lead in paint.  SRM 2589 is composed of paint collected from the interior surfaces of 
housing.    A  unit  of  SRM  2589  consists  of  35  g  of  powdered  paint  material,  99+  %  of  which  passes  a  100 μm 
(No. 145)  sieve.    The  certified  mass  fraction  of  lead,  given  below,  is  based  on  measurements  by  isotope  dilution 
thermal  ionization  mass  spectrometry  (ID-TIMS) with  a minimum  sample  size  of  100  mg.    The  certified value  is 
reported on a dry basis (see “Instructions for Drying”). 
 

 
 
 
The uncertainty in the certified value is calculated as 
 

Certified Mass Fraction 

Lead Content:  9.99 %  ±  0.16 % 

U = kuc 

 
where uc is the combined standard uncertainty calculated according to the ISO Guide [1] and k is a coverage factor.  
The value of uc is intended to represent at the level of one standard deviation, the combined effect of uncertainty 
components  associated  with  material  inhomogeneity  and  ID-TIMS  measurement  uncertainty.    In  the  absence  of 
Type B uncertainties (which are negligible here in comparison with Type A), the expanded uncertainty (U) given is 
for a 95 % confidence interval.  The coverage factor, k = 2.09, is the Student's t-value for a 95 % confidence interval 
with 19 degrees of freedom. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2589 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until 31 December 2020, provided the SRM is handled in accordance with instructions given in this certificate (see 
“Instructions for Use”).  This certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance  of  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If  substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
The  overall  direction  and  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  certification  of  this  SRM  were 
performed by J.R. DeVoe, P.A. Pella, and R.L. Watters, Jr. of the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division.   
 
Partial  financial  support  for  the  development  of  this  SRM  was  provided  by  the  U.S.  Environmental  Protection 
Agency (EPA) under the direction of project managers S.L. Harper and M.E. Beard of the EPA Office of Research 
and Development, National Exposure Research Laboratory, Research Triangle Park, NC. 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD  20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  08 June 2009 
See Certificate Revision History on last Page 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

Stephen A. Wise, Chief 
Analytical Chemistry Division 

SRM 2589 

Page 1 of 3 

Statistical consultation was provided by E.S. Lagergren of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Measurement  Services 
Division. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 
 
To relate analytical determinations to the certified value on this Certificate of Analysis, a minimum sample mass of 
100 mg  should  be  used  and  the  sample  should  be  dried  according  to  the  “Instructions  for  Drying”.    Sample 
preparation procedures should also be designed to effect complete dissolution in order to relate the determined value 
to  the  certified  value.    This  SRM  must  be  stored  in  an  air  conditioned  environment  or  similar  cool  and  dry 
environment away from sunlight and fumes. 
 
Instructions for Drying:  Samples of this SRM should be dried in an .oven at 105 °C for 2 h.  At NIST, loss on 
drying  according  to  this  procedure  was  less  than  1  %  relative  by  mass.    However,  under  different  conditions  of 
humidity, the mass loss could vary.  In order for users to directly relate their analyses to the certified value, loss on 
drying corrections should be measured and applied at the time of the analysis.  
 
COLLECTION, PREPARATION, AND ANALYSIS 
 
Collection:    The  paint  material  for  this  SRM  was  collected  primarily  in  Athens,  Ohio  from  various  interior  wall 
surfaces of old housing which, for the most part, were painted prior to 1945.  The material was collected under the 
direction of the Research Triangle Institute and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.  Collection of paint by 
dry  scraping  and  its  initial  evaluation  for  use  as  SRM  2589  were  performed  by  J.D.  Neefus,  E.E. Williams,  and 
D.B. Binstock,  of  the  Research  Triangle  Institute,  Research  Triangle  Park,  NC,  under  the  leadership  of 
W.F. Gutknecht. 
 
Preparation:  First the largest pieces of debris and foreign material were removed by hand.  Next, the material was 
coarsely chipped in a large-capacity blender fitted with a stainless steel blade.  The material was then further ground 
in small batches in a ball mill.  Each batch was sieved and the fraction that did not pass a 100 μm (#145) sieve was 
returned for further grinding with a fresh charge of coarse paint material.  All material of a size less than 100 μm 
was combined and blended as a single batch before being bottled in 35 g units. 
 
Analysis:    Certification  analysis  by  ID-TIMS  was  performed  by  K.E.  Murphy  and  R.D.  Vocke  of  the  NIST 
Analytical Chemistry Division.  The X-ray fluorescence homogeneity analysis was performed by A.F. Marlow and 
P.A. Pella and the inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometric (ICP-OES) analysis were performed 
by  L.J.  Wood  of  the  NIST  Analytical  Chemistry  Division  and  R.  Saraswati,  Guest  Scientist  from  the  Defense 
Metallurgical Research Laboratory, India. 
 
The ICP-OES analysis data given in Table 1 provide information on the concentrations of major constituents other 
than  lead  in  the  material.    These  values  listed  are  not  certified,  but  are  given  for  information  only  to  provide 
additional information on the matrix. 
 
Environmental  Lead  Proficiency  Analytical  Testing  Program  Results:    This  material  was  included  as  an 
unknown  in  the  Environmental  Lead  Proficiency  Analytical  Testing  Program  (ELPAT)  administered  by  the 
American  Industrial  Hygiene  Association  (AIHA).    Conventional  dissolution  methods  employed  by  participating 
laboratories  include  hotplate,  microwave,  and  other  techniques  such  as  sealed  bomb  dissolutions  and  leaching 
techniques.    Instrumental  determinations  were  performed  using  inductively  coupled  plasma-mass  spectrometry 
(ICP-MS),  inductively  coupled  plasma-optical  emission  spectrometry  (ICP-OES),  flame  atomic  absorption 
spectrometry  (FAAS),  graphite  furnace  atomic  absorption  spectrometry  (GFAAS),  and  X-ray  fluorescence 
spectrometry (XRF).  Information from this study is provided to indicate the state of the practice for lead in paint 
measurements  using  such  methods.   A  summary  of  the  round  robin  lead  results  obtained  from  ELPAT  Reference 
Laboratories for SRM 2589 is presented in Table 2.  The SRM 2589 is identified as round robin 002, paint #4 in the 
ELPAT report. 
 
 

SRM 2589 

Page 2 of 3 

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION 

 
Table 1.  Information Values for Major Constituents of SRM 2589 

 

Element 
 
 

Al 
Ca 
Fe 
Mg 
Ti 
Zn 

Mass Fraction 
(%) 
 
 

1 
12 

0.2 
1 
9 
2 

 
 

(b) 

 
 
 

Table 2.  Environmental Lead Proficiency Analytical Testing (ELPAT) Program 
Summary Statistics of Reference Laboratories for Round Robin 002(a) 
 

Sample 

Paint 4 

n 

31 

Mean 

Minimum  Maximum 

S(b) 

9.55 % 

7.57 % 

10.8 % 

0.91 

 
 
(a)  These  results  are  provided  to  demonstrate  user  experience  with  this  material.    They  were  not  used  in  calculating  the  certified  value  of 

 

SRM 2589. 
s is one standard deviation.  

REFERENCE 

 
[1]  ISO;  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in  Measurement;  ISBN  92-67-10188-9,  1st  ed.,  International 
Organization for Standardization: Geneva, Switzerland (1993); see also Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines 
for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results; NIST Technical Note 1297, U.S. 
Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (1994); available at http://physics.nist.gov/Pubs/. 

 
 
 
 
 
Certificate Revision History:  08 June 2009 (This revision reflects editorial updates): 10 March 2009 (This revision reports an 
extension in the certification period); 10 December 1996 (Original certificate date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  certificate  in  their  possession is  current.    This  can  be  accomplished  by 
contacting the SRM Program at:  telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 926-4751; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via 
the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 
 

SRM 2589 

Page 3 of 3 

