National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 

 
Standard Reference Material 2614a 
 
Carbon Monoxide in Air 
in  Air 
 
(Nominal Amount-of-Substance Fraction 45 µmol/mol) 
mol) 
 
This certificate reports the certified values for Lot 21-G-XX. 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is a primary gas mixture for which the amount-of-substance fraction, expressed 
as  concentration [1],  may  be related to secondary working standards.  This SRM is intended for the calibration of 
instruments used for carbon monoxide determinations and for other applications. 
 
This SRM mixture is supplied in a DOT 3AL specification aluminum (6061 alloy) cylinder with a water volume of 6 L.  
Mixtures are shipped with a nominal pressure exceeding 12.4 MPa (1800 psig), which provides the user with 0.63 m3 
(22.2 ft3) of useable mixture.  The cylinder is the property of the purchaser and is equipped with a CGA-590 brass valve, 
which is the recommended outlet for this carbon monoxide mixture. 
 
Certified Value:  This SRM mixture has been certified for carbon monoxide concentration.  The certified value, given 
below applies to the identified cylinder and NIST sample number. 

nonoxide  concentration 

 

ugust

Carbon Monoxide Concentration: 

  44.01 µmol/mol  ±  0.19 µmol/mol 

Cylinder Number:  sample 
Hydrotest Date:  August 2004 

NIST Sample Number:  sample 
Blend Date: September 2004 

 
 
 
 
 
A  NIST  certified  value  is  a  value  for  which  NIST  has  the  highest  confidence  in  its  accuracy  in  that  all  known  or 
suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [2].  The uncertainty of the certified value includes 
the estimated uncertainties in the NIST standards, the analytical comparisons to the lot standard (LS), and the uncertainty 
of  comparing  the  LS  with  each  of  the  mixtures  comprising  the  lot.    The  uncertainty  is  expressed  as  an  expanded 
uncertainty U = kuc, with uc determined by experiment and a coverage factor k = 2.  The true value for the carbon 
monoxide  amount-of-substance  is  asserted  to  lie  in  the  interval  defined  by  the  certified  value  ± U  with  a  level  of 
confidence of approximately 95 % [3]. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  This certification of SRM 2614a Lot No. 21-G-XX is valid, within the measurement 
uncertainties  specified,  until  06 January 2023,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  the 
instructions given in this certificate (see “Cylinder and Gas Handling Information”).  The certification is nullified if the 
SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Cylinder and Gas Handling Information:  NIST recommends the use of a high-purity, two-stage pressure regulator 
with a stainless steel diaphragm and CGA-590 outlet to safely reduce the pressure and to deliver this SRM mixture to the 
instrument.  The regulator should be purged to prevent accidental contamination of the SRM by repeatedly (minimum 
three times) opening the valve and pressurizing the regulator, then closing the valve and releasing the pressure safely into 
a vent line.  This SRM should not be used after the internal pressure drops below 0.7 MPa (100 psig).  This SRM should 
be stored under normal laboratory conditions within the temperature range of 15 ºC to 30 ºC. 
 
Overall direction and coordination of the technical work required for certification of this SRM were performed by 
F.R. Guenther of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD  20899  
Certificate Issue Date:  05 May 2015 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

Page 1 of 3 

  

SRM 2614a 

4  lot  were  performed  by

 
 
Analytical measurements leading to the certification of this current SRM lot were performed by W.R. Miller of the NIST 
Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Support aspects involved in the issuance of this SRM were coordinated through the NIST Office of Reference Materials.  
 
Traceability:    The  measurand  is  the  total  concentration  of  carbon  monoxide  in  air  and  the  certified  value  is 
metrologically traceable to the SI unit of micromoles carbon monoxide per total moles of carbon monoxide and air. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
Mixture Preparation:  The gas mixtures comprising this SRM lot were prepared in accordance with NIST technical 
specifications by a commercial specialty gas vendor under contract to NIST.  The specifications stipulate that each SRM 
mixture be identical in carbon monoxide concentration and stable with time. 
 
Analytical Methods:  Analyses of the carbon monoxide concentration for this lot of cylinders were conducted by 
intercomparing each cylinder mixture to a representative cylinder chosen from the lot, the LS, using gas chromatography 
with a methanator and a flame ionization detector (GC/Meth/FID).  Assignment of the carbon monoxide concentration to 
the LS was accomplished by intercomparison to primary gravimetric standards using GC/Meth/FID. 
 
Homogeneity Analysis:  Each of the carbon monoxide mixtures, which comprise this SRM lot was compared to the LS 
using a carbon monoxide non dispersive infrared analyzer (CO NDIR).  An analysis of variance indicated that sample to 
sample  carbon  monoxide  concentration  differences  were  statistically  insignificant.    This  indicates  that  within  the 
precision of the NIST measurements, all of the cylinders comprising this SRM lot have identical carbon monoxide 
concentrations.  Therefore, one concentration has been assigned to the entire SRM lot.  
 
Carbon Monoxide Concentration Value Assignment:  The certified carbon monoxide concentration for this SRM lot 
was computed from the assigned concentration for the LS and the homogeneity analysis. 
 
Other  Analyses:    Additional  analyses  performed  during  the  certification  process  are  given  below.    The 
amount-of-substance fractions reported are not certified values.  These values are given for informational purposes only. 
 
CAS Registry Numbers:  This SRM is certified for carbon monoxide in air concentration.  The relevant CAS Registry 
numbers for these components are:  air 132259-10-0; carbon monoxide 630-08-0. 
 
Information Values:  Results for additional analyses performed during the certification process are given below.  The 
concentrations  reported  are  NOT  certified  values.    These  values  are  given  for  informational  purposes  only.    An 
information  value  is  considered  to  be  a  value  that  will  be  of  interest  to  the  SRM  user,  but  for  which  insufficient 
information is available to assess adequately the uncertainty associated with the value, or only a limited number of 
analyses were performed [2]. 
 
 
 
 
 

Mass Spectrometry  

0.93 % mol/mol 

Concentration 

CAS Registry 

Constituent 

7440-37-1 

Method 

Argon 

 

 

Carbon Dioxide 

361 µmol/mol 

GC/Meth/FID  

124-38-9 

Oxygen 

20.8 % mol/mol 

Paramagnetic Analyzer 

7782-44-7 

SRM 2614a 

Page 2 of 3 

REFERENCES 

 
rial 
1]  Thompson, A.;  Taylor, B.N.;  Guide  for  the  Use  of  the  International  System  of  Units (SI);  NIST  Special 

Publication 811; U.S. Government Printing Office:  Washington, DC (2008); available at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/sp811/index.cfm (accessed Mar 2015). 

[3] 

[2]  May, W.; Parris, R.; Beck, C.; Fassett, J.; Greenberg, R.; Guenther, F.; Kramer, G.; Wise, S.; Gills, T.; Colbert, J.; 
Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value Assignment of Reference 
Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260–136,  U.S.  Government  Printing 
(accessed 
Office:  Washington, DC (2000);  available  at  http://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF 
Mar 2015). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data - Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement; 
(GUM 1995  with  Minor  Corrections),  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Mar 2015);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results; NIST Technical Note 1297; U.S. Government Printing Office:  Washington, DC (1994); available at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed Mar 2015). 

03 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Certificate Revision History:  03 April 2015 (Change of expiration date; editorial changes); 16 August 2013 (Editorial correction of subtitle; editorial 
18    
changes); 21 November 2008 (Extension of certification period); 18 October 2005 (Original certificate date).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users of this SRM should ensure that the Certificate of Analysis in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished 
by contacting the SRM Program:  telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the 
Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 2614a 

Page 3 of 3 

