 

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material SRM 2639a 
zen 
Carbon Monoxide in Nitrogen 
 
(Nominal Amount-of-Substance Fraction – 1% mol/mol 
 
This certificate reports the certified values for Lot 54-F-XX. 

Lot 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is a primary gas mixture for which the amount-of-substance fraction, expressed 
as  concentration [1],  may  be related to secondary working standards.  This SRM is intended for the calibration of 
instruments used for carbon monoxide determinations and for other applications. 
 
This SRM mixture is supplied in a DOT 3AL-specification aluminum (6061 alloy) cylinder with a water volume of 6 L.  
Mixtures  are  shipped  with  a  nominal  pressure  exceeding  12.4 MPa  (1800 psig),  which  provides  the  user  with 
0.73 m3 (25.8 ft3) of useable mixture.  The cylinder is the property of the purchaser and is equipped with a CGA-350 
brass valve, which is the recommended outlet for this carbon monoxide mixture. 
 
Certified Value:  This SRM mixture has been certified for carbon monoxide concentration.  The certified value given 
below applies to the identified cylinder and NIST sample number. 

as  been  certified  for  carbon  monoxide

 

Carbon monoxide concentration: 

0.9904 mol/mol  ±  0.0033 mol/mol 

Cylinder Number:  SAMPLE 
Hydrotest Date:  September 2010 

NIST Sample Number:  SAMPLE 
Blend Date:  November 2010 

 
 
 
 
 
A  NIST  certified  value  is  a  value  for  which  NIST  has  the  highest  confidence  in  its  accuracy  in  that  all  known  or 
suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [2].  The uncertainty of the certified value includes 
the estimated uncertainties in the NIST standards, the analytical comparisons to the lot standard (LS), and the uncertainty 
of  comparing  the  LS  with  each  of  the  mixtures  comprising  this  lot.    The  uncertainty  is  expressed  as  an  expanded 
uncertainty  U = kuc  with  uc  determined  by experiment and a coverage factor k = 2.  The true value for the carbon 
monoxide amount-of -substance fraction is asserted to lie in the interval defined by the certified value ± U with a level of 
confidence of approximately 95 % [3]. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2639a Lot 54-F-XX is valid from the certificate issue date, 
within  the  measurement  uncertainties  specified,  until  05 June 2026,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in 
accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this  certificate  (see  “Cylinder  and  Gas  Handling  Information”).    The 
certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Cylinder and Gas Handling Information:  NIST recommends the use of a high-purity, two-stage pressure regulator 
with a stainless steel diaphragm and CGA-350 outlet to safely reduce the pressure and to deliver this SRM mixture to the 
instrument.  The regulator should be purged to prevent accidental contamination of the SRM by repeatedly (minimum 
three times) opening the valve and pressurizing the regulator, then closing the valve and releasing the pressure safely into 
a vent line.  This SRM should not be used after the internal pressure drops below 0.7 MPa (100 psig).  This SRM should 
be stored under normal laboratory conditions within the temperature range of 15 ºC to 30 ºC. 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  28 February 2019 
Certificate Revision on Last Page 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

Steven J. Choquette, Director  
Office of Reference Materials  

Page 1 of 2 

  

SRM 2639a 
 

G.D. 

 
Overall direction and coordination of the technical work required for certification of this SRM were performed by 
J.T. Hodges of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
The analytical measurements leading to the certification of the current SRM lot were performed by G.D. Mitchell of the 
NIST Analytical Chemistry Division. 
 
Office  of  Reference  Materials. 
Support aspects involved in the issuance of this SRM were coordinated through the NIST Office of Reference Materials. 
 
Traceability:    The measurand is the total concentration of carbon monoxide in nitrogen and the certified value is 
metrologically traceable to the SI unit of moles of carbon monoxide per total moles of carbon monoxide and nitrogen. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  Periodic analyses of SRM units from this lot are performed at NIST to monitor 
stability.  If significant changes occur that affect the certification before the expiration of this certificate, NIST will notify 
the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Mixture Preparation:  The gas mixtures comprising this SRM lot were prepared in accordance with NIST technical 
specifications by a commercial specialty gas vendor under contract to NIST.  The specifications stipulate that each SRM 
mixture be identical in carbon monoxide concentration and stable with time. 
 
Analytical Methods:  Analyses of the carbon monoxide concentration for this lot of cylinders were conducted by 
comparing each cylinder mixture to a representative cylinder chosen from the lot, the lot standard (LS), to primary 
gravimetric standards using a gas chromatograph equipped with a thermal conductivity detector (GC/TCD).  
 
Homogeneity Analysis:  Each of the carbon monoxide mixtures that comprise this SRM lot was compared to the LS 
using  a  GC/TCD.    A  statistical  analysis of the analytical results indicated that sample-to-sample carbon monoxide 
concentration  differences  were  not  statistically  significant.    This  indicates  that,  within  the  precision  of  the  NIST 
measurements, all of the cylinders comprising this SRM lot have identical carbon monoxide concentrations.  Therefore, 
one concentration has been assigned to the entire SRM lot. 
 
e  concentration  for  this  SRM  lot 
Carbon Monoxide Concentration Value Assignment:  The certified carbon monoxide concentration for this SRM lot 
was computed from the assigned concentration for the lot standard and the homogeneity analysis. 
 
CAS Registry Numbers:  This SRM is certified for carbon monoxide in nitrogen.  The relevant CAS Registry numbers 
for these components are: carbon monoxide CAS Registry 630-08-0; nitrogen CAS Registry 7727-37-9. 
 

ie  carbon  monoxide 

Registry 

‘carbon 

carbon 

- 

= 

- 

= 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Thompson, A.; Taylor, B.N.; Guide for the Use of the International System of Units (SI); NIST Special Publication 
at 

Office:  Washington, DC 

811; 
https://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/sp811/index.cfm (accessed Sep 2018). 

Government 

available 

Printing 

(2008); 

U.S. 

[3] 

[2]  May, W., Parris, R., Beck, C., Fassett, J., Greenberg, R., Guenther, F., Kramer, G., Wise, S., Gills, T., Colbert, J., 
Gettings, R., MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of Reference 
Materials for Chemical Measurements; NIST Special Publication 260-136, U.S. Government Printing Office; 
available at https://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF (accessed Feb 2019). 
JCGM  100:2008;  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in  Measurement;  (ISO  GUM  1995  with  Minor 
Corrections),  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology:    BIPM,  Sevres  Cedex, France  (2008);  available  at 
https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf; see also Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; 
Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results; NIST Technical Note 
1297; 
at 
https://www.physics.nist.gov/Pubs/contents.html (accessed Feb 2019). 

Office:  Washington, DC 

Government 

available 

Printing 

(1994); 

U.S. 

 
 

  
Certificate Revision History:  28 February 2019 (Change of expiration date; editorial changes); 27 July 2012 (Original certificate date). 

 
 
complished
Users of this SRM should ensure that the Certificate of Analysis in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished 
by contacting the SRM Program at:  telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the 
Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 2639a 
 

Page 2 of 2 

