 

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material 2642a 
Carbon Monoxide in Nitrogen 
 
(Nominal Amount-of-Substance Fraction – 8 % mol/mol) 
 
This certificate reports the certified values for Lot 51-D-XX 

8  % 

Lot 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is a primary gas mixture for which the amount-of-substance fraction, expressed 
as  concentration [1],  may  be  related  to  secondary  working standards.  This SRM is intended for the calibration of 
instruments used for carbon monoxide determinations and for other applications. 
 
This SRM mixture is supplied in a DOT 3AL-specification aluminum (6061 alloy) cylinder with a water volume of 6 L.  
Mixtures  are  shipped  with  a  nominal  pressure  exceeding  12.4 MPa  (1800 psig),  which  provides  the  user  with 
0.73 m3 (25.8 ft3) of useable mixture.  The cylinder is the property of the purchaser and is equipped with a CGA-350 brass 
valve, which is the recommended outlet for this carbon monoxide mixture.   
 
Certified Value:  This SRM mixture has been certified for carbon monoxide concentration.  The certified value given 
below applies to the identified cylinder and NIST sample number.  

 

Carbon Monoxide Concentration: 

  7.859 % mol/mol  ±  0.039 % mol/mol 

Cylinder Number:  «Cylinder_number» 
Hydrotest Date:  August 2000 

«Samp  le_number»
NIST Sample Number:  «Sample_number» 
Blend Date: July 2002 

 
 
 
 
 
A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy in that all known or suspected 
sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [2].  The uncertainty of the certified value includes the 
estimated uncertainties in the NIST standards, the analytical comparisons to the lot standard (LS), and the uncertainty of 
comparing the LS with each of the mixtures comprising this lot.  The uncertainty is expressed as an expanded uncertainty 
U = kuc with uc determined by experiment and a coverage factor k = 2.  The true value for the carbon monoxide amount-of-
substance  fraction  is  asserted  to  lie  in  the interval defined by the certified value ± U with a level of confidence of 
approximately 95 % [3]. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2642a Lot No. 51-D-XX is valid from this certificate issue date, 
within  the  measurement  uncertainties  specified,  until  18 May 2026,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in 
accordance with the instructions given in this certificate (see “Cylinder and Gas Handling Information”).  The certification 
is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Cylinder and Gas Handling Information:  NIST recommends the use of a high-purity, two-stage pressure regulator with a 
stainless  steel  diaphragm  and CGA-350 outlet to safely reduce the pressure and to deliver this SRM mixture to the 
instrument.  The regulator should be purged to prevent accidental contamination of the SRM by repeatedly (minimum 
three times) opening the valve and pressurizing the regulator, then closing the valve and releasing the pressure safely 
into a vent line.  This SRM should not be used after the internal pressure drops below 0.7 MPa (100 psig).  This SRM 
should be stored under normal laboratory conditions within the temperature range of 15 ºC to 30 ºC. 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  13 September 2018 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

Page 1 of 2 

  

SRM 2642a 
 

carbon 

1f  carbon 

 
Overall  direction  and  coordination  of  the  technical  work  required  for  certification  of  this SRM were performed by 
J.T. Hodges of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
The analytical measurements leading to the certification of the current SRM lot were performed by W.R. Miller of the 
NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Office  of  Reference  Materals 
Support aspects involved in the issuance of this SRM were coordinated through the NIST Office of Reference Materials. 
 
Traceability:    The  measurand  is  the  total  concentration  of  carbon  monoxide  in nitrogen and the certified value is 
metrologically traceable to the SI unit of moles of carbon monoxide per total moles of carbon monoxide and nitrogen. 
 
r 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  Periodic analyses of SRM units from this lot are performed at NIST to monitor 
stability.  If significant changes occur that affect the certification before the expiration of this certificate, NIST will notify 
the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
1  accordance  with  NIST  technical 
Mixture  Preparation:  The gas mixtures comprising this SRM lot were prepared in accordance with NIST technical 
specifications by a commercial specialty gas vendor under contract to NIST.  The specifications stipulate that each SRM 
mixture be identical in carbon monoxide concentration and stable with time. 
 
Analytical  Methods:    Analyses  of  the  carbon  monoxide  concentration for this lot of cylinders were conducted by 
comparing  each  cylinder  mixture  to  a  representative  cylinder  chosen from the lot, the lot standard (LS), to primary 
gravimetric standards using a gas chromatograph equipped with a thermal conductivity detector (GC/TCD).   
 
Homogeneity Analysis:  Each of the carbon monoxide mixtures that comprise this SRM lot was compared to the LS using 
a GC/TCD.  A statistical analysis of the analytical results indicated that sample-to-sample carbon monoxide concentration 
differences were not statistically significant.  This indicates that, within the precision of the NIST measurements, all of the 
cylinders comprising this SRM lot have identical carbon monoxide concentrations.  Therefore, one concentration has 
been assigned to the entire SRM lot.  
  
Carbon Monoxide Concentration Value Assignment:  The certified carbon monoxide concentration for this SRM lot was 
computed from the assigned concentration for the lot standard and the homogeneity analysis. 
 
for 
CAS Registry Numbers:  This SRM is certified for carbon monoxide in nitrogen.  The relevant CAS Registry numbers for 
these components are: carbon monoxide CAS Registry 630-08-0; nitrogen CAS Registry 7727-37-9. 
 

Registry 

certificat 

|  carbon 

carbon 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Thompson, A.; Taylor, B.N.; Guide for the Use of the International System of Units (SI); NIST Special Publication 
at 
Office: 

Washington, DC 

Government 

811; 
https://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/sp811/index.cfm (accessed Sep 2018). 

available 

Printing 

(2008); 

U.S. 

[3] 

[2]  May, W.,  Parris, R.,  Beck, C.,  Fassett, J.,  Greenberg, R.,  Guenther, F.,  Kramer, G.,  Wise, S.,  Gills, T.,  Colbert, J., 
Gettings, R., MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of Reference 
Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office; 
available at https://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF (accessed Sep 2018). 
JCGM 100:2008; Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement; (ISO GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections), 
(2008);  available  at 
Joint  Committee 
https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf; see also Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; 
Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results; NIST Technical Note 
1297; 
at 
https://www.physics.nist.gov/Pubs/contents.html (accessed Sep 2018). 

  BIPM,  Sevres  Cedex, France 

Office:  Washington, DC 

in  Metrology: 

for  Guides 

Government 

available 

Printing 

(1994); 

U.S. 

  

  

 
 
Certificate Revision History:  13 September 2018 (Change of expiration date; editorial changes); 02 September 2011 (Extension of certification period; editorial 
   
changes); 20 June 2007 (Extension of certification period); 06 March 2003 (Original certificate date). 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program  at:    telephone  (301) 975-2200;  fax  (301) 948-3730;  e-mail 
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 2642a 
 

Page 2 of 2 

