National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material 2660a 

 

 

 
Total Oxides of Nitrogen (NOX) in Air 
 
(Nominal Amount-of-Substance Fraction – 100 µmol/mol) 
 
This certificate reports the certified value for Lot 2660-C-XX. 

Cylinder Number:  SAMPLE 
Hydrotest Date:  April 2005 

Total NOX Concentration:  98.0 µmol/mol    1.0 µmol/mol 

NIST Sample Number:  SAMPLE 
Blend Date:  October 2005 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is a primary gas mixture for which the amount-of-substance fraction, expressed 
as  concentration [1], may be related to secondary working standards.  This SRM is intended for the calibration of 
instruments used for total oxides of nitrogen determinations and for other uses. 
 
This SRM mixture is supplied in a DOT 3AL specification aluminum (6061 alloy) cylinder with a water volume of 6 L.  
Mixtures  are  shipped  with  a  nominal  pressure  exceeding  12.4 MPa (1800 psig),  which  provides  the  user  with 
0.73 m3 (25.8 ft3) of useable mixture.  The cylinder is the property of the purchaser and is equipped with a CGA-660 
stainless steel valve, which is the recommended outlet for this total oxides of nitrogen mixture. 
 
Certified Value:  This SRM mixture has been certified for the total oxides of nitrogen (NOX) concentration which is 
defined  as  the  sum  of  the  nitrogen  dioxide (NO2)  concentration  plus  the  contaminant  gaseous  nitric  acid (HNO3) 
concentration.  The certified value given below applies to the identified cylinder and NIST sample number. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A  NIST  certified  value  is  a  value  for  which  NIST  has  the highest  confidence  in  its  accuracy  in  that  all  known  or 
suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [2].  The uncertainty of the certified value includes 
the estimated uncertainties in the NIST standards, the analytical comparisons to the lot standard (LS), and the uncertainty 
of  comparing  the  LS  with  each  of  the  mixtures  comprising  this  lot.    The  uncertainty  is  expressed  as  an  expanded 
uncertainty U = kuc with uc determined by experiment and a coverage factor k = 2.  The true value for the total NOX 
amount-of-substance fraction is asserted to lie in the interval defined by the certified value  U with a level of confidence 
of approximately 95 % [3]. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2660a Lot No. 2660-C-XX is valid from this certificate issue 
date, within the measurement uncertainties specified, until 31 December 2015, provided the SRM is handled and stored 
in  accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this  certificate  (see  “Cylinder  and  Gas  Handling  Information”).    The 
certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Cylinder and Gas Handling Information:  NIST recommends the use of a high-purity, two-stage pressure regulator 
with a stainless steel diaphragm and CGA-660 outlet to safely reduce the pressure and to deliver this SRM mixture to the 
instrument.  The regulator should be purged to prevent accidental contamination of the SRM by repeatedly (minimum 
three times) opening the valve and pressurizing the regulator, then closing the valve and releasing the pressure safely into 
a vent line.  This SRM should not be used after the internal pressure drops below 0.7 MPa (100 psig).  This SRM should 
be stored under normal laboratory conditions within the temperature range of 15 ºC to 30 ºC. 
 
The overall direction and coordination of the technical work required for certification of this SRM were performed by 
F.R. Guenther of the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division. 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  14 July 2011 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

Stephen A. Wise, Chief 
Analytical Chemistry Division 

SRM 2660a 

Page 1 of 3 

Analytical measurements leading to the certification of the current SRM lot were performed by W.J. Thorn III of the 
NIST Analytical Chemistry Division. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Measurement  Services 
Division. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
Mixture Preparation:  The gas mixtures comprising this SRM lot were prepared in accordance with NIST technical 
specifications by a commercial specialty gas vendor under contract to NIST.  The specifications stipulate that each SRM 
mixture be identical in NOX concentration and stable with time. 
 
Analytical Methods:  Analyses of the NOX concentration for this lot of cylinders were conducted by comparing each 
cylinder  mixture  to  a  representative  cylinder  chosen  from  the  lot,  the  lot  standard (LS),  using  NIST’s  NOX 
chemiluminescence primary analytical method.  Assignment of the NOX concentration to the LS was accomplished by 
comparison to gravimetric nitric oxide primary standard mixtures and by comparison to dynamically generated NO2 in air 
standards using calibrated NO2 permeation tubes. 
 
Homogeneity Analysis:  Each of the NOX mixtures that comprise this SRM lot was compared to the LS using NIST’s 
NOX  chemiluminescence  primary  analytical  method.    A  statistical  analysis  of  the  analytical  results  indicated  that 
sample-to-sample  NOX  concentration  differences  were  not  statistically  significant.    This  indicates  that,  within  the 
precision of the NIST measurements, all of the cylinders comprising this SRM lot have identical NOX concentrations.  
Therefore, one concentration has been assigned to the entire SRM lot.  
 
Total NOX Concentration Value Assignment:  The certified total NOX concentration for this SRM lot was computed 
from the assigned concentration for the LS and the homogeneity analysis.  The total NOX concentration is the sum of the 
NO2 concentration and the HNO3 concentration. 
 
Estimate of Percent HNO3 Contamination of Total NOX:  HNO3 is formed whenever a NO2 mixture is added to an 
aluminum cylinder.  An estimate of the gaseous percent HNO3 contamination level in this SRM 2660a lot expressed as a 
percent  relative  to  the  total  NOX  concentration  was  determined  using  nylon  membrane  filters  and  by  fourier 
transform-infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR).  An estimated value of 2.6 % HNO3 relative to the total NOX concentration was 
determined  for  this  SRM 2660a  lot.    Similarly,  an  estimated  value  of  97.4 %  NO2  relative  to  the  total  of  NOX 
concentration was determined for this SRM.  These estimates are not NIST certified values, but are presented here for 
user informational purposes only. 
 
Verification of Air Matrix Composition:  The air matrix in SRM 2660a closely matches ambient air.  Six SRM 2660a 
mixtures from the lot were analyzed by gas chromatography to verify the air matrix composition.  The average of the six 
measured values are: (0.93  0.02) % mol/mol argon, (363  6) µmol/mol carbon dioxide and (21.5  0.2) % mol/mol 
oxygen.  These values are not NIST certified concentrations but are presented here for user informational purposes only. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Air 
Nitric Acid 
Nitrogen Dioxide 

132259-10-0 
7697-37-2 
10102-44-0 

CAS Registry 

Constituent 

 

SRM 2660a 

Page 2 of 3 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Thompson, A.;  Taylor, B.N.;  Guide  for  the  Use  of  the  International  System  of  Units  (SI);  NIST  Special 
at 

Printing  Office:  Washington, DC 

Publication 811;  U.S.  Government 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/sp811/indexfull.cfm (accessed July 2011). 

available 

(2008); 

[3] 

for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136 

[2]  May, W.; Parris, R.; Beck II, C.; Fassett, J.; Greenberg, R.; Guenther, F.; Kramer, G.; Wise, S.; Gills, T.; Colbert, J.; 
Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of Reference 
Materials 
(2000);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/srm/publications.cfm (accessed July 2011). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data   Guide to the Expression of in Measurement (ISO GUM 1995 
with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides 
in  Metrology (JCGM)  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  July 2011);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note  1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed July 2011). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users of this SRM should ensure that the Certificate of Analysis in their possession is current. This can be accomplished 
by contacting the SRM Program: telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 926-4751; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the 
Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 2660a 

Page 3 of 3 

