me  ihe  Commerce 
rst 

" 

Malcal 

   

National  Bureau  of  Standards 

Certificate  of  Analysis 

Standard  Reference  Material  2672a 

Freeze-Dried  Urine  Certified  for  Mercury 

This  Siandard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  as  an  analytical  standard  foe  the  determination 
SRM  2672a  consists  of  four  bottles  of  freeze-dried  urine  containing  mercury,  two  bottles  cach  at  low 
of  mercury  in  urine. 
and  elevated  levels.  The  low  level  material  is  normal  ucine  (hat  was  prepared  from  pogied  samples.  The  elevated  level 
was  prepared  by  spiking  the  norma!  level  with  a  stabilized  solution  of  mercury.  The  certified  value  is  based  on  analysis  of 
the  reconstituted  urine,  resulting  from  the  addition  of  20  ml.  of  mercury-free  water  (see  instructions  for  use  below)  to 
cach  bottle, 

Material 

Low  level 

Mercury,  mgs  lL. 

(0.002) 

Elevated  levet 

0.108  +  0.008 

The  certified  vaiue  for  the  ctevated  ievel  is  based  upon  the  determination  by  cold  vapor  atomic  absorption  spectrometry 
of  samples  randomly  selected  from  the  entire  lot.  Contirmatory  analyses  were  made  by  neutron  activation  analysis. 
The  value  for  the  low  level,  in  parentheses,  is  not  certified  but  given  for  information  aoly, 

The  uncertainty  of  Che  certified  value  is  the  statistical  tolerance  interval,  at  the  95%  level,  for  coverage  of  99%  of  the 
samples  of  SRM  2672a.  With  a  954)  confidence,  the  Hg  concentration  in  at  least  99%  of  the  samples  of  this  SRM  should 
be  included  in  the  above  interval. 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  should  be  reconstituted  by  the  addition  of  20  mL  af  mercury-free  water  (ic. 
Use: 
Ef  the  water  used  is  not  free  of  mercury,  suitable 
watcr  containing  less  than  0.0001  mg/L  Hg),  at  23°C  to  each  bottle. 
blank  corrections  should  be  made  for  ils  mercury  content,  When  reconstituted,  the  specific  gravity  of  SRM  2672a  is 
LOLLT  +  0.0002  giml.  ar  23°C. 

Notice  to  Users:  The  reconstituted  material  may  be  considered  as  (resh  urine  and  shauld  be  handted  under  the  same 
conditions  as  such  samples.  [tis  recommended  that  SRM  267  2a  be  stared  under  refrigeration  or  freezer  conditions.  The 
physical  and  chemical  stability  of  SRM  2672a  has  not  been  rigorously  assessed.  NBS  will  continue  to  monitor  thr 
stability  of  this  SRM  and  if  the  certification  becomes  invalid,  the  purchasers  will  be  notihed. 

The  certified  values  are  based  upon  measurements  made  at  NBS  by  T.C.  Rains  and  T.A.  Rush  of  the  Inorgank 
Analytical  Research  Division. 

The  overall  direction  and  coordination  of  technical  measurements  leading  to  certification  were  performed  bi 
E.L.  Garner,  Chiet,  Inorganic  Research  Division. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  che  certification  and  issuance  of  this  Standard  Reference  Maternal  wer: 
coerdinated  through  the  Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials  by  T.E.  Gills 

Washington,  D.C. 
May  16,  1983 

20234 

George  A.  Uniano,  Chict 
Office  of  Standard  Reference  Material

