National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 2841 

 

 

 
Semiconductor Thin Film:  AlxGa1-xAs Epitaxial Layers 
 
(Al mole fraction x near 0.20) 
 
Serial Number:  Sample 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  for  use  as  a  reference  standard  for  analytical  methods  that 
measure  the  composition  of  thin  films,  such  as  electron  microprobe  analysis (EMPA),  photoluminescence (PL), 
auger electron spectroscopy (AES) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS).  A unit of SRM 2841 consists of 
an  epitaxial  layer  of  AlxGa1-xAs  with  certified  Al mole fraction x  grown  on  a  gallium  arsenide (GaAs)  substrate 
mounted to a stainless steel disk by the use of adhesive tape.  Each unit is sealed in a Mylar envelope containing a 
nitrogen  atmosphere.    Proper  use  of  the  SRM  as  a  comparison  standard  depends  on  the  analytical  method  (see 
“Measurement Conditions and Procedures” and NIST Special Publication 260-163 [1]). 
 
Certified Aluminum Value:  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its 
accuracy in that all known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or accounted for by NIST [2].  The 
certified value for the aluminum (Al), expressed as a mole fraction, is provided in Table 1.  The certified value is 
based on a confirmed correlation between Al mole fraction and the energy of the peak intensity in the PL spectrum 
of the film [3,4].  The uncertainty of the certified value is an expanded uncertainty (k = 2) intended to approximate a 
95 %  level  of  confidence [5].    Two  additional  quality  checks  were  performed  on  each  SRM  unit.    First,  the 
molecular  beam  epitaxy  growth  system  was  monitored  during  the  growth  of  the  specimen.    For  acceptance  as  an 
SRM, the Al mole fraction determined from the intensity oscillations of reflection high energy electron diffraction 
for each unit had to agree with the certified value above within its expanded uncertainty.  Second, the free carrier 
concentration of the film had to be between 1 × 1016 cm–3 and 5 × 1016 cm–3. 
 

Table 1.  Certified Value (mole fraction) for Aluminum in SRM 2841 

Aluminum:  Sample    Sample 

 
 
 
Expiration of Certificate:  The certification of SRM 2841 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until  01 August 2021,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  instructions  given  in  this 
certificate (see “Instructions for Handling, Storage, and Use”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified.  Surface oxidation and contamination will increase through use and storage of 
the specimen.  For applications that are sensitive to surface contamination, the SRM and unknown specimens will 
require in situ cleaning, typically light sputtering.  The SRM should be replaced if sputtering the film causes it to 
visibly roughen or to show signs of selective sputtering. 
 
Maintenance  of  SRM  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If 
substantive  technical  changes  occur  that affect  the  certification before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST will 
notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  the  certification  of  SRM 2841  was  provided  by 
K.A. Bertness of the NIST Quantum Electronics and Photonics Division. 
 
Statistical consultation was provided by C.-M. Wang of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Measurement  Services 
Division. 
 
 

Kent Rochford, Chief 
Quantum Electronics and Photonics Division 

Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  18 October 2011 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

SRM 2841 

 

Page 1 of 3 

Reference Photoluminescence Peak Energy Value:  A NIST reference value is a noncertified value that is the best 
estimate  of  the  true  value  based  on  available  data;  however,  the  value  does  not  meet  the  NIST  criteria  for 
certification [2]  and  is  provided  with  associated  uncertainties  that  may  reflect  only  measurement  reproducibility, 
may not include all sources of uncertainty, or may reflect a lack of sufficient statistical agreement among multiple 
analytical methods.  The reference value and expanded uncertainty (k = 2) for the energy of the peak intensity of the 
PL spectrum for this SRM composition value is provided in Table 2.  The value has been corrected to a excitation 
volume temperature equivalent of 25.2 °C including a laser heating correction of 0.1 °C above ambient. 

 
Table 2.  Reference Energy Value for the Peak Intensity of the PL Spectrum of SRM 2841 

PL Spectrum:  Sample eV    Sample eV 

 
 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
Storage and Handling:  AlGaAs is a stable chemical compound but the film is subject to surface contamination and 
oxidation  during  storage  and  handling.    The  SRM  should  be  stored  in  a  dust-free,  nitrogen  atmosphere  or  under 
vacuum at temperatures below 50 °C.  Incidental exposure to air for transport to or use in an analysis system was not 
seen  to  produce  significant  contamination  until  such  exposure  exceeds  thousands  of  hours.    The  SRM  should  be 
handled by the metal mounting disk with clean, nonmetallic tweezers, without contacting the semiconductor region.  
Particulate contamination of the semiconductor surface may be removed with deionized water or dry nitrogen flow, 
and users must confirm that additional contamination has not been introduced.  The adhesive tape used to mount the 
semiconductor  to  the  stainless  steel  disk  is  soluble  in  isopropanol,  acetone  and  other organic  solvents,  and  use of 
those solvents could result in adhesive or tape particles  migrating to the specimen surface.  Extreme edges of the 
specimen surface should be excluded from analysis. 
 
Measurement  Conditions  and  Procedures:    Analytical  methods  vary  in  their  sensitivity  to  materials  properties 
unrelated to the film composition.  A list of potential complications is provided in Table 3.  More detailed discussion 
is contained in reference 1. 
 

Table 3.  Potential Confounding Factors in Comparisons Between SRM 2841 and AlGaAs Test Films of Unknown 
Composition. 

 
Note:  Glow discharge mass spectrometry (GDS) and secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS), both conventional 
and time-of-flight SIMS (TOF-SIMS) are included. 
 

Method 
 
PL 

X-ray Rocking Curves 

AES, XPS, TOF-SIMS 

Comments on Comparison Measurements 

temperature 

low  doping  concentration,  and  specimen 

 
Wavelength  calibration, 
correction required [3].  Thin layers may display quantum confinement energy shifts. 
 
Not recommended for high accuracy comparisons. 
 
Surface  oxides  and  hydrocarbons  alter  results;  remove  surface  contamination  by 
sputtering  both  SRM  film  and  test  film.    Monitor  for  selective  sputtering.    Sampling 
depth may be an issue for thin test films. 
 
Ignore  data  points  from  outer  10 nm  of  film.    Monitor  for  selective  sputtering, 
development of surface topography, and matrix effects. 
 
Compare films of similar thickness or of uniform composition over sampling depths. 

SIMS, GDS 

EMPA 

 
 

 

SRM 2841 

 

Page 2 of 3 

REFERENCES 

 
[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

Bertness, K.A.;  Harvey T.E.;  Wang, C.-M.;  Paul, A.J.;  Robins, L.H.;  Composition  Standards  for  AlGaAs 
Epitaxial Layers; NIST Special Publication 260-163; U.S. Government Printing Office:  Washington, DC 
(2006). 
May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.;  Gettings, R.;  MacDonald, B.;  Definitions  of  Terms  and  Modes  Used  at  NIST 
for 
Value-Assignment of Reference Materials for Chemical Measurements; NIST Special Publication 260-136; 
U.S. Government Printing Office: Gaithersburg, MD (2000); available at 
http://www.nist.gov/srm/publications.cfm (accessed Oct 2011). 
Robins, L.H.;  Armstrong, J.T.;  Marinenko, R.B.;  Paul, A.J.;  Pellegrino, J.G.;  Bertness, K.A.;  J.  Appl. 
Phys., Vol. 93, pp. 3747–3759 (2003). 
Bertness, K.A.;  Wang, C.-M.;  Salit, M.L.;  Turk, G.C.;  Butler, T.A.;  Paul, A.J.;  Robins, L.H.; 
High-accuracy  Epitaxial  AlGaAs  Composition  Determination  with  Inductively  Coupled  Plasma  Optical 
Emission Spectroscopy; J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, Vol. 24, No. 2, pp 762–767 (2006). 
JCGM 100:2008;  Evaluation  of  Measurement  Data  -  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in 
Measurement (ISO GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections); Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (2008); 
available 
(accessed 
Oct 2011); see also Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty 
of  NIST  Measurement  Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office: 
Washington, DC (1994); available at http://physics.nist.gov/Pubs/ (accessed Oct 2011). 

http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf 

at 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Certificate Revision History:  18 October 2011 (Extension of certification period; editorial changes); 14 July 2006 (Original certificate date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
(301) 926-4751; 
telephone 
accomplished  by  contacting 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

fax 

 

SRM 2841 

 

Page 3 of 3 

