 National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material® 2855 
 
Additive Elements in Polyethylene 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  for  the  calibration  or  evaluation  of  methods  for  elemental 
analysis of polymers.  A unit of SRM 2855 consists of one bottle of Level I low-density polyethylene, one bottle of 
Level II  high-density  polyethylene,  and  one  bottle  of  Level III  high-density  polyethylene.    Each  bottle  contains 
approximately 80 g of material in pellet form. 
 
Certified Mass Fraction Values:  Certified values for constituents in SRM 2855 Level II and Level III are reported 
in Table 1.  Value assignment categories are based on the definition of terms and modes used at NIST for chemical 
reference materials [1].  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy, 
in that all known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account.  A certified value is the 
present  best  estimate  of  the  true  value  based  on  the  results  of  analyses  performed  at  NIST  and  collaborating 
laboratories using instrumental test methods. 
 
Reference Mass Fraction Values:  Reference values for SRM 2855 Level II and Level III are reported in Table 2.  
Reference values are non-certified values that are the present best estimates of the true values.  However, the values 
do not meet the NIST criteria for certification and are provided with associated uncertainties that may not include all 
sources of uncertainty [1]. 
 
Information  Mass  Fraction  Values:    Information  values  for  constituents  in  SRM 2855  Level I  are  reported  in 
Table 3.  Information values for SRM 2855 Level II and Level III are reported in Table 4.  An information value is 
considered to be a value that will be of interest to the SRM user, but insufficient information is available to assess the 
uncertainty associated with the value [1].  Information values cannot be used to establish metrological traceability.   
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2855 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
2  with  instructions  given  in  this  certificate 
until 01 June 2025, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with instructions given in this certificate 
“the  SRM  is  damaged,
(see  “Instructions  for  Storage,  Handling,  and  Use”).    The  certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is  damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination of technical measurements for certification of SRM 2855 was under the direction of J.R. Sieber of the 
NIST Chemical Sciences Division and T.H. Palmgren of ASTM International Subcommittee D20.70. 
 
Analytical  measurements  for  certification  of  this  SRM  were  performed  at  NIST  by  J.L. Molloy,  J.R. Sieber, 
R.L. Temple, Jr., and L.J. Wood of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division, and Y. Li (NIST Guest Researcher) of the 
National Institute of Metrology, Beijing, China. 
 
Statistical consultation for the value assignment of SRM 2855 was provided by D.L. Duewer of the NIST Chemical 
Sciences Division and by S.D. Leigh of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Support aspects involved with the certification and issuance of this SRM were coordinated through the NIST Office 
of Reference Materials. 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  13 June 2019 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 
 
Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

 

Page 1 of 5 

  

SRM 2855  

INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE, HANDLING, AND USE 
 
Polyethylene  is  a  thermoplastic  that  is  often  prepared  for  analysis  by  grinding  at  cryogenic  temperatures  or  by 
compression molding with heating.  Polyethylene can oxidize at high temperatures in the presence of air.  Guidance 
for compression molding is available from ASTM International D 4703 [2]. 
 
Homogeneity testing was performed at NIST using X-ray fluorescence spectrometry.  On the basis of the homogeneity 
test results and the results of quantitative analyses, it is recommended to use a quantity of material greater than 100 
mg to ensure that results obtained can be related to assigned values on this Certificate of Analysis. 
 
Store  material  in  its  original,  tightly-capped  container  at  room  temperature (15 ºC  to  35 ºC)  and away  from  direct 
illumination. 
 
Testing of Restricted Substances 
 
Although  the  three  materials  comprising  SRM 2855  were  not  formulated  with  the  intention  of  making  the  SRM 
applicable for testing of restricted substances, SRM 2855 can be used for that purpose.  The elements of concern (Cr, 
Br, Cd, Hg, and Pb) were not intentionally added to the polyethylene blends.  Chromium is present in Level II and 
Level III as a result of contact with the polymerization catalyst.  The assigned values for the element Cr are provided 
in Table 1 and Table 3 as total Cr.  Assigned values for the elements Br, Cd, Hg, and Pb are provided in Table 3 and 
Table 4 as information values after careful measurements using XRF at NIST.  These elements were not present above 
the detection limits of the NIST XRF method. 
 

Table 1.  Certified Values for SRM 2855 Level II and Level III 

 

Constituent 

Level II 

Sodium (Na) 
Phosphorous (P) 
Sulfur (S) 
Calcium (Ca) 
Titanium (Ti) 
Chromium (Cr) 
Zinc (Zn) 

 
Level III 

Sodium (Na) 
Phosphorous (P) 
Sulfur (S) 
Calcium (Ca) 
Titanium (Ti) 
Chromium (Cr) 
Zinc (Zn) 

Mass Fraction(a) 
(mg/kg) 

415 

±  20 

16.0  ± 
22.0  ± 
21.0  ± 
37.6  ± 
10.4  ± 
2.4  ± 

16.4  ± 
41.6  ± 
41.2  ± 
77.2  ± 
10.4  ± 
2.4  ± 

1.5 
1.5 
1.4 
5.1 
0.3 
0.5 

1.3 
2.9 
3.1 
2.4 
0.3 
0.5 

807 

±  15 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(a) Values are reported as mass fractions [3].  For all elements except Cr, the assigned value is an unweighted mean of the results 
sults
from two or three analytical methods.  The uncertainty listed with the value is an expanded uncertainty about the mean, with 
coverage  factor  k = 2,  calculated  by  combining  a  between-method  variance  with  a  pooled,  within-method  variance [4,5] 
following the JCGM Guide [6].  For the element Cr, the assigned value is the median of the set of laboratory mean results, and 
the uncertainty is an expanded uncertainty about the median, with coverage factor k = 2, calculated using the inflated standard 
deviation of the mean of the laboratory mean results.  See “Combining Results” below.  The certified values are the measurands 
and are metrologically traceable to the SI derived unit of mass fraction (expressed as milligram per kilogram). 

SRM 2855  

 

Page 2 of 5 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 

Table 2.  Reference Values for SRM 2855 Level II and Level III 

Constituent 

Level II 

Silicon (Si) 
 

Level III 

Silicon (Si) 

Mass Fraction(a) 
(mg/kg) 

186.7  ± 

3.8 

183.1  ± 

4.1 

 

 
 
 
 

(a) Values are reported as mass fractions [1].  Each assigned value is an unweighted mean of the results from two analytical methods.  
rds. 
k 
The  uncertainty  listed  with  the  value  is  an  expanded  uncertainty  about  the  mean,  with  coverage  factor  k = 2,  calculated  by 
~ 
combining  a  between-method  variance  with  a  pooled,  within-method  variance [4,5]  following  the  JCGM  Guide [6].    See 
3] 
“Combining Results” below.  The reference values are the measurands as determined by the methods indicated below and are 
cated  below  and  are 
metrologically traceable to the SI derived unit of mass fraction (expressed as milligram per kilogram). 

Table 3.  Information Values for SRM 2855 Level I 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

Constituent 

Sodium (Na) 
Silicon (Si) 
Phosphorous (P) 
Sulfur (S) 
Calcium (Ca) 
Titanium (Ti) 
Chromium (Cr) 
Zinc (Zn) 
Bromine (Br) 
Cadmium (Cd) 
Mercury (Hg) 
Lead (Pb) 

Constituent 

Bromine (Br) 
Cadmium (Cd) 
Mercury (Hg) 
Lead (Pb) 

< 4 
< 6 
1 
< 2 
< 1 
< 1 
< 1 
< 0.5 
< 2 
< 3 
< 3 
< 2 

< 2 
< 3 
< 3 
< 2 

Table 4. Information Values for SRM 2855 Level II and Level III 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

 
 
PLANNING, PREPARATION, TESTING, AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
The  materials  for  SRM 2855  were  compounded  under  the  direction  of  R. Ziegler,  Westlake  Chemicals, 
(Longview, TX).  The materials were designed in collaboration with ASTM International Committee D20 on Plastics, 
Subcommittee 70 on Analytical Methods.  Additives compounds used in the formulations of Level II and Level III 
high-density polyethylene blends included calcium stearate, sodium benzoate, zinc oxide, distearyl thiodipropionate, 
and tris-(2,4-di-tert-butylphenyl) phosphite. 

                                                 

(1) Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this certificate in order to specify adequately 
>  of
the  experimental  procedure.  Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  National  Institute  of 
Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the 
purpose. 
SRM 2855  

Page 3 of 5 

 

Test Methods Employed at NIST and the Collaborating Laboratories 
 
Inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICPOES):  Ca, Cr, Na, P, S, Si, Ti, Zn 
Instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA) at collaborating laboratories:  Ca, Na, S, Si, Ti, Zn 
X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF) at collaborating laboratories:  Ca, Cr, Na, P, S, Si, Ti, Zn 
X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF) at NIST:  Br, Ca, Cd, Cr, Hg, Na, P, Pb, S, Si, Ti, Zn 
 
Collaborating Laboratories 
 
Cooperative  testing  was  coordinated  by  ASTM  International  Committee  D20.70  in  conjunction  with  the 
Interlaboratory  Study  Program  of  ASTM  International,  West  Conshohocken, Pennsylvania, USA.    The  following 
laboratories participated in an ASTM International interlaboratory study (ILS). 
 
Chevron Phillips Chemical Co. (Kingwood, TX) J. Ilger 
Chevron Phillips Chemical Co. (Baytown, TX) C. Ball 
Chevron Phillips Chemical Co. (Orange, TX) G. MacMurtrie 
Chevron Phillips Singapore Chemicals (Singapore, Malaysia) L. Hua 
Dow Chemical (Freeport, TX) D. Burns 
Dow Chemical (Midland, MI) L. Brehm 
Dow Chemical (Piscataway, NJ) C. Taylor 
Dow Chemical (Terneuzen, The Netherlands) M. Van Os 
Dow Corporation, Union Carbide Div. (South Charleston, WV) W-L. Shen 
DSM Resolve (Geleen, The Netherlands) H. Vanwersch 
Exxon Mobil (Baton Rouge, LA) S. Chang 
INEOS Chemical Company (Houston, TX) M. Bothwell 
Lyondell-Basell (Cincinnati, OH) B. Fulton 
Nova Research & Technology Centre (Calgary, Alberta, Canada) G. Yamashita 
PANalytical, Inc. (Almelo, The Netherlands) T. Van der Maten 
Qatar Chemical Co. (Doha, Qatar) A. Rana 
Westlake Chemical Co. (Longview, TX) R. Ziegler, D. Todd 
 
Combining Results 
 
Results provided by the participants of the D20.70 ILS were obtained using ICPOES, INAA, and XRF test methods.  
The results  of this  study underwent  technical  evaluation  at  NIST followed by  statistical  analysis  to obtain  an  ILS 
consensus value for each element in each material.  Critical evaluation of data from the ILS was aided by software 
created  by  D.L. Duewer  of  the  NIST  Chemical  Sciences  Division [4].    The  software  contains  statistical  tools  for 
describing the distribution of data and a number of published algorithms for calculating consensus values and estimates 
of uncertainty of the consensus values. 
 
For Level I, results from two NIST methods (XRF and ICPOES) were combined with the ILS data set and included 
in the consensus values calculations using the software described above.  For phosphorus in Level I, the median of the 
laboratory mean results was assigned as the information value shown in Table 3.  For the other elements, the pooled, 
within-laboratory variance was used to estimate the limits of detection shown as “less than” (<) values in Table 3. 
 
For each element in Level II and in Level III except Cr, the mean of the laboratory mean values was chosen as the 
consensus value for the ILS.  This consensus value was used as a single estimate and assumed to be from a single 
method,  although  in  reality  three  methods  contributed  to  most  consensus  values.    The  consensus  value  was  then 
combined  with  results  from  two  NIST  methods (XRF  and  ICPOES),  using  the  method  of  Levenson  et  al. [5]  to 
calculate the assigned value and the estimate of uncertainty shown in Table 1 or Table 2.  For Cr in Level II and in 
Level III, all ILS results from individual laboratories from both Level II and Level III materials along with the NIST 
results were combined into a single data set.  This was done because the mass fraction of Cr was known a priori to be 
the same in both high-density polyethylene (HDPE) blends and because there were insufficient results to treat each 
level separately.  In Table 1, the assigned value for Cr is the median of this combined set of results. 

SRM 2855  

 

Page 4 of 5 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of 
Reference Materials for Chemical Measurements; NIST Special Publication 260-136 U.S. Government Printing 
Office:  Washington, DC  (2000);  available  at  https://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF  (accessed 
June 2019). 

[2]  ASTM  Standard  D 4703,  Standard  Practice  for  Compression  Molding  Thermoplastic  Materials  into  Test 

Specimens, Plaques or Sheets; ASTM International, West Conshohocken, PA. 

[3]  Thompson, A.;  Taylor, B.N.;  Guide  for  the  Use  of  the  International  System  of  Units (SI);  NIST  Special 
at 

Printing  Office:  Washington, DC 

Publication 811;  U.S.  Government 
https://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/sp811/index.cfm (accessed June 2019). 

available 

(2008); 

[4]  Duewer, D.L.,  A  Comparison  of  Location  Estimators  for  Interlaboratory  Data  Contaminated  with  Value  and 
Value  and 

Uncertainty Outliers; Accred. Qual. Assur.; Vol. 13, pp. 193-216 (2008). 

[5]  Levenson, M.S.; Banks, D.L.; Eberhardt, K.R.; Gill, L.M.; Guthrie, W.F.; Liu, H.-K.; Vangel, M.G.; Yen, J.H.; 
Zang, N.F.; An Approach to Combining Results from Multiple Methods Motivated by the ISO GUM; J. Res. Natl. 
Inst. Stand. Technol., Vol. 105, pp. 571–579 (2000).  

[6]  JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data - Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement; 
(GUM 1995  with  Minor  Corrections),  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology (JCGM)  (2008);  available  at 
https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  June 2019);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
https://www.nist.gov/pml/nist-technical-note-1297 (accessed June 2019). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Certificate Revision History:  13 June 2019 (Change of expiration date; editorial changes); 10 May 2013 (Extension of the certification period; 
editorial changes); 01 April 2009 (Original certificate date). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting 
fax  (301) 948-3730;  e-mail 
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

telephone  (301) 975-2200; 

the  SRM  Program: 

SRM 2855  

 

Page 5 of 5 

