ENT  OF 

hy. 

 
,
p
E

 
*

 
t
o

National Institute of Standards and Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material 2892 

 

0.04 

olution  ( 

 
Ethanol-Water Solution (Nominal Mass Fraction 0.04 %) 
 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is a solution of ethanol (ethyl alcohol:  Chemical Abstracts Service [CAS] 
Registry  Number  64-17-5)  in  water  at  a  nominal  mass  fraction  of  0.04 %  and  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  the 
calibration of instruments and techniques used for the determination of ethanol.  A unit of SRM 2892 consists of five 
2 mL ampoules, each containing approximately 1.2 mL of solution. 
 
Certified  Mass  Fraction  of  Ethanol:    The  certified  value  given  below  is  based  on  results  obtained  from  the 
gravimetric  preparation  of  the  solution  and  from  the  analytical  results  determined  using  gas  chromatography  and 
titrimetry.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy in that all 
known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [1]. 
 

Certified Mass Fraction of Ethanol:  0.03900 %  ±  0.00046 % 

f  SRM 

 
The result is expressed as the certified value ± the expanded uncertainty.  The certified value is an unweighted mean 
of concentrations determined by gravimetric preparation and chromatographic and titrimetric measurements [2].  The 
uncertainty  listed  is  an  expanded  uncertainty  about  the  mean,  with  coverage  factor 2  (approximately  95 % 
confidence),  calculated  by  combining  a  between-source  variance  incorporating  inter-method  bias  with  a  pooled 
within-source variance following the GUM Guide [3].  The uncertainty includes both correction for estimated purity 
and allowance for differences among the concentrations determined by gravimetric preparation and chromatographic 
and titrimetric measurements. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2892 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
vecified,
until 30 April 2023, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with instructions given in this certificate 
(see “Instructions for Handling, Storage, and Use”).  However, the certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance  of  SRM  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If 
substantive  technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will 
notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
The coordination of the technical measurements leading to the certification of this SRM was under the direction of 
M.M. Schantz and S.A. Wise of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Statistical consultation for this SRM was provided by S.D. Leigh of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Partial funding support for the preparation and certification of this SRM was provided by the National Institute of 
Justice (NIJ) and managed through the NIST Office of Law Enforcement Standards (OLES). 
 
Preparation of and analytical measurements on the SRM were performed by J.V. Goodpaster and M.M. Schantz of 
the NIST Chemical Sciences Division and M.P. Cronise and C.N. Fales of the NIST Office of Reference Materials.  
Additional  analytical  measurements  were  performed  by  M. Archer  of  the  National  Metrology  Laboratory, 
Pretoria, South Africa. 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  12 April 2013 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

“hemical  Sciences 

Page 1 of 3 

  

SRM 2892 

Support  aspects  involved  with  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
Handling:  The solution contains ethanol in water at the stated concentration.  Use proper disposal methods. 
 
Storage:  Sealed ampoules, as received, should be stored in the dark at temperatures between 10 °C and 30 °C. 
 
Use:    Sample  aliquots  for  analysis  should  be  withdrawn  immediately  after  opening  the  ampoules  and  should  be 
processed without delay for the certified value to be valid within the stated uncertainty.  Because of the volatility of 
ethanol, the certified value is NOT applicable to material stored in ampoules that have been opened for more than 
2 min, even if they are resealed. 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
The solution was prepared at NIST by weighing and mixing known masses of ethanol and organic-free water.  The 
solution  was  mixed  overnight  (a  minimum  of  16 h).    The  total  mass  of  the  solution  was  measured,  and  the 
concentration was calculated from this gravimetric procedure.  The  gravimetric concentration was adjusted for the 
purity  estimation  of  the  ethanol,  which  was  determined  using  gas  chromatography  with  flame  ionization 
detection (GC-FID)  with  two  stationary  phases  of  different  polarities,  differential  scanning  calorimetry,  and  Karl 
Fischer analysis for water content.  The bulk solution was chilled slightly, and 1.2 mL aliquots were dispensed into 
2 mL amber glass ampoules, which were then flame sealed. 
 
Aliquots  from  nine  ampoules,  selected  using  a  random  stratified  sampling  scheme,  were  analyzed  in  duplicate  by 
using  capillary  gas  chromatography  with  flame  ionization  detection  on  a  relatively  polar  DB-wax  column, 
15 m × 0.45 mm  id,  0.85 µm  film  thickness  (Agilent  Technologies, Wilmington, DE, USA).  The internal standard 
added  to  each  sample  for  quantification  purposes  was  1-propanol.    Calibration  solutions  consisting  of  weighed 
amounts of ethanol and the internal standard compound in organic-free water were chromatographically analyzed to 
determine analyte response factors.  
 
In addition, the concentration of the solution was determined at the National Metrology Laboratory using titrimetry.  
The ethanol in known masses of the solutions was oxidized to acetic acid using a known mass of standard potassium 
dichromate solution in the presence of sulfuric acid.  The quantity of ethanol in the solution was determined from the 
quantity  of  unreacted  potassium  dichromate  in  the  solution.    To  determine  the  quantity  of  unreacted  potassium 
dichromate, potassium iodide was added to the oxidized mixture, and the liberated iodine was titrated with a sodium 
thiosulfate solution.  Seven titrations were done for this solution. 

                                                           

(1) Certain commercial instruments, materials, or processes are identified in this report to adequately specify the experimental 
procedure.    Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and 
Technology,  nor  does  it  imply  that  the  instruments,  materials,  or  processes  identified  are  necessarily  the best available for the 
purpose. 

SRM 2892 

Page 2 of 3 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value Assignment 
of  Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136  (2000);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF (accessed Apr 2013). 

[3] 

[2]  Levenson, M.S.; Banks, D.L.; Eberhardt, K.R.; Gill, L.M.; Guthrie, W.F.; Liu, H.-k.; Vangel, M.G.; Yen, J.H.; 
Zhang, N.F.;  An  Approach  to  Combining  Results  from  Multiple  Methods  Motivated  by  the  ISO  GUM; 
J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., Vol. 105, pp. 571–579 (2000). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data - Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement; 
(GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections), Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (JCGM) (2008); available at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Apr 2013);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed Apr 2013). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
26   
Certificate Revision History:  12 April 2013 (Extension of certification period; editorial changes): 26 March 2004 (Original certificate date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by 
(301) 948-3730; 
telephone 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

http://www.nis.

contacting 

fax 

SRM 2892 

Page 3 of 3 

