National Institute of Standards and Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material 2893a 
 
Ethanol-Water Solution 
Solution 
 
(Nominal Mass Fraction 0.08 %) 
 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is a solution of ethanol (ethyl alcohol: Chemical Abstracts Service [CAS] 
Registry  Number  64-17-5)  in  water  at  a  nominal  mass  fraction  of  0.08 %.   SRM 2893a  is  intended  for  use  in  the 
calibration  of  instruments  and  techniques  used  for  the  determination  of  ethanol  in  aqueous  solutions.    A  unit  of 
SRM 2893a consists of five 2 mL ampoules, each containing approximately 1.2 mL of solution.   
 
Certified Value:  The certified mass fraction value expressed as percent and associated uncertainty is given in Table 1.  
A NIST certified  value is a  value  for  which NIST has the  highest confidence in its accuracy  in that all known or 
suspected sources of bias have been investigated or accounted for by NIST [1]. The certified values are based on the 
agreement of results obtained at NIST using two analytical techniques.  Metrological traceability is to the SI derived 
unit for mass fraction, expressed as percent, through the mass balance purity assessment of neat material, determined 
by  gas  chromatography  with  flame  ionization  detection  (GC-FID)  using  two  separate  columns  and  Karl  Fischer 
analysis, and the certified value of SRM 2897a Ethanol-Water Solution (Nominal Mass Fraction 2 %) used to prepare 
calibrants. 
 

08 % 

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fraction Value of Ethanol in SRM 2893a 

of  Ethanol  in  SRM 

 

Nominal Mass Fraction Level 
(%) 

Mass Fraction(a) 
(%) 

0.08 

 

0.07663  ±  0.00097 

(a) The value is expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the certified  mass fraction value (expressed as percent) and U95%(x) is the 
expanded uncertainty of the certified value [2]. The true value of the analyte is believed to lie within the interval x ± U95%(x) 
with 95 % confidence. To propagate this uncertainty, treat the certified value as a normally distributed random variable with 
mean x and standard deviation U95%(x)/2.  

uncertainty 

 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 2893a is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until  30 April 2037,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  the  instructions  given  in  this 
certificate (see “Instructions for Handling, Storage, and Use”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified.  
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  the  certification  of  this  SRM  was  under  the  direction  of 
J.A. Murray and W.A. MacCrehan of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Preparation  of  and  analytical  measurements  on  the  SRM  were  performed  by  J. Murray  and  B. Lang  of  the  NIST 
Chemical Sciences Division.   
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
22 
Certificate Issue Date:  22 December 2017 

Steven J. Choquette., Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

by  J.

Page 1 of 3 

  

SRM 2893a 

Statistical consultation and evaluation of the data were provided by N.-F. Zhang, of the NIST Statistical Engineering 
Division. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
Handling:  The solutions contain ethanol in water at the stated concentration.  Use proper disposal methods. 
 
Storage:  Sealed ampoules, as received, should be stored in the dark at temperatures between 10 °C and 30 °C. 
 
Use:    Sample  aliquots  for  analysis  should  be  withdrawn  immediately  after  opening  the  ampoules  and  should  be 
processed without delay for the certified values in Table 1 to be valid within the stated uncertainty.  Because of the 
volatility of ethanol, the certified values are NOT applicable to material stored in ampoules that have been opened for 
more than 2 min, even if they are resealed. 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
The solution was prepared at NIST by weighing and mixing known masses of ethanol and organic-free water.  The 
solution was mixed overnight (minimum of 12 h).  Aliquots of 1.2 mL were dispensed into 2 mL amber glass ampoules 
that had been evacuated with argon and then flame sealed.  
 
Aliquots from twelve ampoules, selected using a random stratified sampling scheme, were analyzed in duplicate by 
using  GC-FID  on  a  relatively  polar  DB-wax  column,  15 m × 0.45 mm id,  0.85 µm  film  thickness  (Agilent 
Technologies,  Wilmington, DE).    The  internal  standard  added  to  each  sample  for  quantification  purposes  was 
1-propanol.  Calibration solutions consisting of weighed amounts of ethanol and the internal standard compound in 
organic-free water were chromatographically analyzed to determine analyte response factors.  The ethanol used to 
prepare  the  calibration  solutions  were  adjusted  for  the  mass  balance  purity  estimation  of  the  ethanol,  which  was 
determined  using  GC-FID  with  two  stationary  phases  of  different  polarities,  and  Karl  Fischer  analysis  for  water 
content.  
 
In  addition  to  the  GC-FID  analyses,  the  mass  fraction  of  the  solution  was  determined  by  using  gas 
chromatography-mass  spectrometry  (GC-MS)  on  an  Rxi-1301Sil  MS  column,  60 m × 0.25 mm  id,  1.0 µm  film 
thickness  (Restek  Technologies,  Bellefonte, PA).    The  internal  standard  added  to  each  sample  for  quantification 
purposes  was  1-propanol.    Calibration  solutions  consisting  of  weighed  amounts  of  SRM 2897a  and  the  internal 
standard compound in organic-free water were chromatographically analyzed to determine analyte response factors.  
Aliquots from six ampoules were analyzed in duplicate by GC-MS.  
 
Information Value:  The density of SRM 2893a was estimated at 20 °C using a density meter with an oscillating 
U-tube  sensor  is  given  in  Table 2.  An  information  value  is  a  value  that  will  be  of  interest  to  the  SRM  user,  but 
insufficient information is available to assess the uncertainty associated with the value or only a limited number of 
analyses were performed [1].  Information values cannot be used to establish metrological traceability. 
  

12 
n  flame  sealed. 

Table 2.  Information value for the density of SRM 2893a at 20 °C. 
 

SRM

Nominal Mass Fraction Level 
(%) 

Density 
(g/mL) 

0.9981 

 
 

0.08 

 

                                                           

(1) Certain commercial equipment, instrumentation, or materials are identified in this certificate to adequately specify the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by NIST, nor does it imply that the 
materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
SRM 2893a 

Page 2 of 3 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment 
of  Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136;  U.S.  Government 
Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (2000);  available  at  http://www.nist.gov/srm/publications.cfm  (accessed 
Dec 2017) 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(GUM  1995  with  Minor  Corrections);  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Dec 2017);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement 
Results; NIST Technical Note 1297; U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (1994); available at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/tn1297/index.cfm (accessed Dec 2017). 

[2] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This  can  be
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting 
(301)  948-3730; 
 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301)  975-2200; 

telephone 

rent. 

fax 

SRM 2893a 

Page 3 of 3 

