National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 2951 

 

 

 

Respirable Alpha Quartz on Filter Media 
 
(Nominal Mass of Alpha Quartz – 5 μg) 
 
This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  the  calibration  of  X-ray  diffraction  (XRD) 
spectrometers for the determination of respirable alpha quartz using National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health (NIOSH) Method 7500 [1], or the equivalent (see INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE).  The SRM was produced by 
depositing  a  known  amount  of  SRM  1878a  Respirable  Alpha  Quartz,  as  a  slurry  on  a  25 mm  diameter  polyvinyl 
chloride  (PVC)  filter.    A  unit  of  SRM  2951  consists  of  five  filters,  each  containing  a  nominal  mass  of  5  μg  of 
respirable alpha quartz.  The SRM is provided with five blank PVC filters containing no alpha quartz.  The blank 
filters  and  the  loaded  filters  are  stored  in  two  clear  plastic  petri  dishes,  respectively,  with  blue  spacer  sheets 
separating the filters. 
 

Table 1.  Mass of Alpha Quartz in SRM 2951 

Certified Alpha Quartz Mass:    4.85 μg  ±  0.44 μg 

 
 
 
filter,  provided  in  Table  1,
Certified Mass of Alpha Quartz on Filter:  The certified mass of alpha quartz on each filter, provided in Table 1,  
is based on results obtained from the gravimetric preparation of the filters and from the determination of silicon by 
inductively  coupled  plasma  optical  emission  spectrometry  (ICP–OES)  [2,3].    The  results  are  expressed  as  the 
certified value ± the expanded uncertainty [4].  The gravimetric preparation value of the alpha quartz mass per filter 
was calculated as the average mass of SRM 1878a on each filter multiplied by the certified mass fraction of alpha 
quartz  in  SRM  1878a.    The  ICP–OES  value  for  alpha  quartz  mass  per  filter  was  calculated  from  the  determined 
mass of silicon per filter, the determined mass fraction of silicon in SRM 1878a, and the certified mass fraction of 
alpha quartz in SRM 1878a [3]. 
 
Certified Value:  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy in 
that  all  known  or  suspected  sources  of  bias  have  been  investigated  or  accounted  for  by  NIST  [4].    The  certified 
value  is  the  unweighted  average  of  the  masses  determined  by  gravimetric  and  ICP-OES  measurements.    The 
expanded  uncertainty  is  calculated  as  U  =  kuc,  where  uc  is  intended  to  represent,  at  the  level  of  one  standard 
deviation, the combined uncertainty due to material variability and measurement uncertainty calculated according to 
the  method  described  in  the  ISO  and  NIST  Guides  [5].    The  coverage  factor,  k  =  2.31,  is  determined  from  the 
Student’s t-distribution corresponding to the calculated effective degrees of freedom at 95 % level of confidence. 
 
Expiration  of  Certification:    The  certification  of  this  SRM  lot  is  valid  until  31  December  2016,  within  the 
measurement  uncertainty  specified,  provided  the  SRM  is  handled  and  stored  in  accordance  with  the  instructions 
given in this certificate.  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or modified.   
 
Maintenance  of  SRM  Certification:    NIST  will  monitor  this  SRM  over  the  period  of  its  certification.    If 
substantive technical changes occur that affect the certification before the expiration of this certificate, NIST will 
notify the purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
The coordination of the technical measurements leading to the certification was under the direction of L.L. Yu of 
the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division.   
 
Analytical measurements were performed at NIST by L.L. Yu of the NIST Analytical Chemistry Division.   
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD  20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  07 February 2007 
See Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Chief 
Measurement Services Division 

Stephen A. Wise, Chief 
Analytical Chemistry Division 

Page 1 of 2

  

SRM 2951 

 
Consultation  on  the  statistical  design  of  the  experimental  work  and  evaluation  of  the  data  were  provided  by 
W.F. Guthrie of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Support  for  the  preparation  and  certification  of  this  Standard  Reference  Material  was  provided  by  the  National 
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. 
 
The  support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  Measurement  Services 
Division. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 
 
This  SRM  was  developed  for  use  with  NIOSH  Method  7500  [1].    Sample  preparation  for  this  method  calls  for 
filters to either be ashed or dissolved in tetrahydrofuran prior to XRD measurements.  The ashing option must be 
used with this SRM rather than dissolution.  This SRM may also be used for NIOSH Methods 7602 [1] and 7603 
[1], and Quartz Analytical Method (P-7) [6] using infrared absorption spectrometry.   
 
Sealed filters, as received, should be stored in the dark at temperatures between 15 °C and 25 °C.  
 
NOTICE AND WARNING TO USERS 
 
It  must  be  handled  with  care  and 
This  material  contains  respirable  alpha  quartz  that  is  known  to  cause  silicosis.    It  must  be  handled  with  care  and 
disposed of according to federal, state and local regulations.     
 
Cooperating  Laboratory1:    The  materials  for  this  SRM  were  prepared  at  High  Purity  Standards,  Inc. 
(Charleston, SC). 
 

. 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  NIOSH  Manual  of  Analytical  Methods  (NMAM®),  4th ed.;  Cassinelli, M.E.;  O’Connor, P.F.,  Eds.; 

Department of Health and Human Services (NIOSH) Publication No. 94-113 (1994).  

[2]  Yu,  L.L.;  Fassett,  J.D.;  Lindstrom,  A.P.;  Determination  of  Si  in  Standard  Reference  Material  SRM  295x 

Silica-on-Filter; J. Anal. At. Spectrom., Vol. 18, p. 738 (2003). 

[3]  Yu,  L.L.;  Fassett,  J.D.;  MacDonald,  B.S.;  Butler,  T.A.;  Ramsey,  D.M.;  Key-Schwartz,  R.J.;  Rains,  T.C.; 
Development  of  SM295x  and  296x,  Respirable  Crystalline  Silica  on  Filter;  J.  ASTM  International,  Vol.  2, 
Issue 5 (2005). 

[5] 

[4]  May,  W.;  Parris,  R.;  Beck  II,  C.;  Fassett,  J.;  Greenberg,  R.;  Guenther,  F.;  Kramer,  G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills,  T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assessment 
of  Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136;  U.S.  Government 
Printing Office:  Washington, DC (2000). 
ISO;  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in  Measurement;  ISBN  92-67-10188-9,  1st  ed.,  International 
Organization  for  Standardization:    Geneva,  Switzerland  (1993);  see  Taylor,  B.N.;  Kuyatt,  C.E.; Guidelines 
for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement  Results;  NIST  Technical  Note  1297, 
U.S. Government Printing Office:  Washington, DC (1994). 
http://www.osha.gov/SLTC/etools/silica/measure_amount/labconsider/selectingtechnique/p7/p7.html

[6] 
 
 
 
Certificate Revision History:  07 February 2007 (Editorial changes); 11 December 2006 (Original certificate date). 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  certificate  in  their  possession  is  current.  This  can  be  accomplished  by 
contacting the SRM Program at: telephone (301) 975-6776; fax (301) 926-4751; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via 
the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm.

  

 

                                                           

1Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this certificate in order to specify adequately 
the  experimental  procedure.  Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  National  Institute  of 
Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the 
purpose. 

SRM 2951 

Page 2 of 2

