National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
 
Standard Reference Material 3222 
 
Cigarette Tobacco Filler 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended primarily for use in evaluating the accuracy of procedures for 
the  determination  of  nicotine (NIC);  tobacco  specific  nitrosamines (TSNAs),  N-nitrosonornicotine (NNN)  and 
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK);  and  moisture  in  tobacco.    It  is  also  intended  for  use  in 
validating  working  or  secondary  reference  materials.    SRM 3222  was  prepared  from  air-cured,  low  nicotine 
tobacco [1].  A unit of SRM 3222 consists of 20 jars, each containing approximately 10 g of cigarette tobacco filler. 
 
The  development  of  SRM 3222  was  through  collaboration  with  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and 
Technology (NIST) and the Food and Drug Administration Center for Tobacco Products (FDA CTP). 
 
Certified  Mass  Fraction  Values:    The  certified  mass  fraction  values  for  nicotine,  NNN,  NNK,  and  volatiles  in 
SRM 3222 are provided in Table 1.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in 
its accuracy in that all known or suspected sources of bias  have been investigated or taken into account [2].  The 
certified values are based on the results of NIST measurements using isotope dilution liquid chromatography with 
tandem  mass spectrometry (ID-LC-MS/MS)  with different sample preparation techniques, and  with  measurements 
performed at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and commercial laboratories. 
 
Reference  Mass  Fraction  Values:    Reference  mass  fraction  values  for  volatiles  and  moisture  in  SRM 3222,  are 
reported on an as-received basis in Table 2.  A NIST reference value is a noncertified value that is the best estimate 
of the true value based on available data; however, the value does not meet the NIST criteria for certification [2] and 
is  provided  with  associated  uncertainties  that  may  reflect  only  measurement  reproducibility,  may  not  include  all 
sources of uncertainty, or may reflect a lack of sufficient statistical agreement among multiple analytical methods.  
The reference mass fraction values were derived from results reported by NIST and/or commercial laboratories.  
 
Expiration  of  Certification:    The  certification  of  SRM 3222  is  valid,  within  the  measurement  uncertainty 
stored  in  accordance  with  instructions  given  in 
specified, until 30 September 2021, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with instructions given in 
certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is  damaged, 
this  certificate  (see  “Instructions  for  Storage  and  Use”).    The  certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is  damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination of the technical measurements leading to the certification of SRM 3222 was performed by L.C. Sander 
of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division.   Coordination of other aspects of  SRM development  was performed by 
M. Walters, T. Phillips, and M. Holman of the FDA CTP.  Acquisition of the material was performed by M. Walters. 
 
Measurements  were  performed  by  J.S. Pritchett,  Y.  C. Daniels,  L.C. Sander,  L. Wood,  and  B. Lang  of  the  NIST 
Chemical Sciences Division, and by G. Lee, J. Lisko, B. Lane, L. Valentin, B. Kimbrell, P. Kuklenyik, and S. Stanfill 
at the CDC. 
 
Statistical consultation was provided by J. Yen of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Analyses  were  also  performed  by  commercial  laboratories:    Enthalpy  Analytical, Inc.  (Richmond, VA),  Global 
Laboratory Services, Inc. (Wilson, NC), and Microbac Laboratories, Inc. (Wilson, NC). 
 

2s  Division. 

fic 

 
4

 
 
 
99
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  23 August 2016 

  

SRM 3222 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

 

Page 1 of 4 

Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials.   
 
NOTICE AND WARNINGS TO USERS:  For research use. Not for human consumption. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage:  SRM 3222 is stored at –20 ºC at NIST, and is shipped cold.  Upon receipt, the material should be stored at 
controlled temperature (–20 °C to 0 °C), in unopened bottles, until required for use. 
 
thawed  to  room  temperature 
Use:    Bottles  of  the  SRM  to  be  analyzed  should  be  removed  from  the  freezer  and  thawed  to  room  temperature 
(20 °C to 25 °C).  It is recommended that the contents of the jar be ground prior to removal of subsamples.  One gram 
or larger test portions should be analyzed as received (i.e., without drying) and results converted to a dry-mass basis 
through a correction factor for volatiles. 
 
SOURCE, PREPARATION, AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
lied  by  22nd  Century  Group,  Inc., 
Source and Preparation:  Air-cured, low nicotine tobacco was processed and supplied by 22nd Century Group, Inc., 
(subcontracted by RTI International) using normal procedures used for the production of cigarette tobacco filler.  The 
dried and chopped leaves (referred to as “cut rag”; 30 cuts per inch) were blended and enclosed in plastic bags that 
were placed in cardboard cartons containing approximately 68.2 kg (150 lbs) of tobacco.  These materials were stored 
at –20 °C prior to packaging.  Four ounce jars were filled to capacity with tobacco, without additional processing.  A 
unit  of  SRM 3222  consists  of  a  box  containing  20 jars  of  cigarette  tobacco  filler,  with  each  jar  containing 
approximately 10 g of the bulk material. 
 
Analysis:    Value  assignment  of  levels  of  nicotine  and  TSNAs  in  SRM 3222  was  based  on  the  results  from 
measurements carried out at NIST using ID-LC-MS/MS methods.  Different approaches were utilized in preparing 
samples for analysis; in each case, internal standards consisting of deuterated analogs of nicotine, NNN, and NNK 
were added prior to sample preparation. 
 
One  gram  samples  of  tobacco  were  finely  ground  using  an  automated  mortar  and  pestle.    Aliquots  of  the  labeled 
internal  standard  solutions  were  added  to  approximately  0.250 g  portions  of  the  ground  material  in  15 mL 
polypropylene tubes.  Ten milliliters of 100 mM aqueous ammonium acetate were added to each tube, and then vortex 
mixed for 60 minutes to perform the extraction.  After the extraction period, the samples were filtered using 0.45 μm 
PVDF membrane syringe filters and the filtrate was transferred into autosampler vials for analysis. 
 
Samples were also extracted with methanol, using a different mixing approach.  The contents of a jar were ground, 
and one gram subsamples were processed.  After the addition of the internal standards, five milliliters of methanol 
were added to each sample, and the slurry was processed by rotational inversion mixing at 60 rpm, for a period of 
18 h.    After  extraction,  the  slurries  were  centrifuged  for  10 min  at  3750 rpm  (3210 g).    Unfiltered  aliquots  of  the 
supernatant solution were placed in autosampler vials for analysis.  Samples were also extracted by the same method, 
but using 100 mM aqueous ammonium acetate. 
 
Volatile components were determined by multiple methods.  Approximately 0.5 g samples of tobacco were placed 
into weighed glass containers to an approximate depth of two centimeters.  For determination by oven drying, the 
samples were placed in a forced-air oven at either 80 ºC or 100 ºC for three hours, removed and allowed to cool in a 
desiccator,  and  reweighed.    For  determination  by  desiccator  drying,  samples  were  placed  in  a  desiccator  over 
magnesium perchlorate.  Masses were recorded at seven day intervals until a constant mass was achieved at 35 days.  
Moisture measurements were performed with a coulometric Karl Fischer oven method [3]. 
 
Homogeneity Analysis:  A stratified random sampling scheme was devised to test for homogeneity across the lot of 
bottles.  There was no apparent trend in the data when plotted against the sequence in which the bottles were prepared. 
 

of  levels 

con

 

                                                           

(1) Certain commercial instruments, materials, or processes are identified in this certificate to adequately specify the experimental 
procedure.    Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and 
Technology,  nor  does  it  imply  that  the  instruments,  materials,  or  processes  identified  are  necessarily  the  best  available  for  the 
purpose. 
SRM 3222 

Page 2 of 4 

 

Certified Mass Fraction Values:  The uncertainty provided with each value is an expanded uncertainty about the 
mean  to  cover  the  measurand  with  approximately  95 %  confidence  using  statistical  methods  consistent  with  the 
ISO/JCGM Guide and with its Supplement 1 [4,5].  The expanded uncertainty is calculated as U = kuc, where uc is the 
combined standard uncertainty and k is a coverage factor corresponding to approximately 95 % confidence for each 
analyte [4].  The measurand is the total mass fraction for each analyte listed in Table 1.  Metrological traceability is 
the SI derived unit of mass fraction (expressed as milligrams per gram, nanograms per gram, or grams per gram). 
 
 

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fraction Values for Nicotine, TSNAs, and Volatiles in SRM 3222 

Values  for  Nicotine, 

 

Mass Fraction(a) 
(as-received) 

Mass Fraction(b) 
(dry-mass basis) 

Nicotine 

0.117 mg/g  ± 

0.018 mg/g 

0.132 mg/g ± 

0.021 mg/g 

NNN 
NNK 

 1440 ng/g 
  31.3 ng/g 

90 ng/g 

2.5 ng/g 

  1630 ng/g 
 

35.4 ng/g 

±  110 ng/g 
± 

2.8 ng/g 

 

 

± 
± 

± 

Volatiles(c) 

0.115 g/g 

0.002 g/g 

 

 

k 

2.00 

2.00 
2.00 

2.00 

 
(a) Values are reported on an “as-received” basis.   
(b) Values are reported on a dry-mass basis using the certified value for volatiles as a conversion factor. 
(c) Volatiles are reported based on data obtained for oven drying at 80 ºC for three hours and desiccator drying over magnesium 

perchlorate for 35 days. 

Values: 

 
 
Reference Mass Fraction Values:  The uncertainty provided with each value is an expanded uncertainty about the 
mean  to  cover  the  measurand  with  approximately  95 %  confidence  using  statistical  methods  consistent  with  the 
ISO/JCGM Guide and with its Supplement 1 [4,5].  The expanded uncertainty is calculated as U = kuc, where uc is the 
combined standard uncertainty and k is a coverage factor corresponding to approximately 95 % confidence for each 
analyte [4].  The measurand is the mass fraction for each analyte listed based on the indicated method.  Metrological 
traceability is the SI derived unit of mass fraction (expressed as a percent). 
 
 

Table 2.  Reference Mass Fraction (As-Received Basis) Values for Volatiles and Moisture in SRM 3222 

Values  for  Volatiles  and  Moisture

Aass  Fraction  (As 

 

 

 

 

Volatiles (mass loss) 
 
 
 
 

Forced-Air Oven Drying at 80 °C for 3 h 
Forced-Air Oven Drying at 100 °C for 3 h 
Desiccator Drying(a) 
Hearson Tobacco Oven for 16 h 

Moisture (water; Karl Fischer)(b) 

Mass Fraction 
(%) 

 
 
 
 
 

 

11.6 ±  0.1 
12.1 ±  0.6 
11.4 ±  0.1 
11.9 ±  0.1 

10.6 ±  0.9 

k 

 
2.05 
2.00 
2.05 
2.23 

2.23 

 
(a)  Values represent mass loss upon desiccator drying over magnesium perchlorate to constant mass, achieved after 35 days. 
(b) Values represent water determined using the Karl Fischer oven distillation method. 
 

 

SRM 3222 

 

Page 3 of 4 

REFERENCES 
 
[1]  Title 7  Agriculture  Part 30 – Tobacco  Stocks  and  Standards,  U.S.  Code  of  Federal  Regulations,  7 CFR 30,  

pp. 168–175 (1974). 

[2]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment- of 
Reference Materials for Chemical Measurements; NIST Special Publication 260-136; U.S. Government Printing 
Office:  Washington, DC  (2000);  available  at  http://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF  (accessed 
Aug 2016). 

[3]  Margolis, S.A.;  Systematic  Errors  in  Measurement  of  Moisture  by  Karl  Fischer  Methods;  Third  International 

Symposium on Humidity and Moisture, Vol. 2, pp. 133–140 (1998). 

Vol. 

[4]  JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data – Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement; 
(GUM 1995  with Minor Corrections), Joint  Committee  for Guides in Metrology (JCGM) (2008); available at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Aug 2016);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at  
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed Aug 2016). 

[5]  JCGM 101:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data – Supplement 1 to the Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty 
in  Measurement  –  Propagation  of  Distributions  Using  a  Monte  Carlo  Method;  JCGM  (2008);  available  at 
ivailable  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_101_2008_E.pdf (accessed Aug 2016).  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
This  can  be
accomplished  by  contacting 
(301) 948-3730; 
telephone 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

assession  is  current. 

fax 

 

SRM 3222 

 

Page 4 of 4 

