National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 3282 

 

 

Low-Calorie Cranberry Juice Cocktail 

 
This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  validating  analytical  methods  for  the 
determination of organic acids and nutrient elements in cranberry juice cocktails and similar matrices.  This SRM can 
also be used for quality assurance when assigning values to in-house control materials.  A unit of SRM 3282 consists 
of five ampoules, each containing approximately 1.2 mL of material. 
 
The  development  of  SRM 3282  was  a  collaboration  between  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and 
Technology (NIST) and the National Institutes of Health, Office of Dietary Supplements (NIH-ODS). 
 
Certified  Mass  Fraction Values:    Certified  mass  fraction  values  for  organic  acids  and  elements  are  provided  in 
Tables 1  and 2,  respectively.   A  NIST  certified  value  is  a  value  for  which  NIST  has  the  highest  confidence  in  its 
accuracy in that all known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [1].  Analyses for 
value assignment were performed by NIST and collaborating laboratories.  The certified values were calculated as the 
mean  of  the  mean  values  from  NIST  methods  and  the  median  of  the  mean  results  provided  by  collaborating 
laboratories,  where  appropriate.    The  associated  uncertainties  are  expressed  at  an  approximately  95 %  level  of 
confidence [2–4]. 
 
Reference Mass Fraction Values:  Reference mass fraction values for additional organic acids, anions, elements, and 
sugars are provided in Tables 3 through 5.  A NIST reference value is a noncertified value that is the best estimate of 
the true value based on available data; however, the values do not meet the NIST criteria for certification [1] and are 
provided with associated uncertainties that may reflect only measurement reproducibility, may not include all sources 
of  uncertainty,  or  may  reflect  a  lack  of  sufficient  statistical  agreement  among  multiple  analytical  methods.    The 
reference  mass  fraction  values  were  derived  from  results  provided  by  NIST  or  collaborating  laboratories.    The 
associated uncertainties are expressed at an approximately 95 % level of confidence [2–4]. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 3282 is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
until 30 November 2025, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with the instructions given in this 
certificate (see “Instructions for Handling, Storage, and Use”).  The certification is nullified if the SRM is damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Overall  direction  and  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  the  certification  of  this  SRM  were 
performed by L.C. Sander of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division, K.E. Sharpless of the NIST Special Programs 
Office, and S.A. Wise formerly of NIST. 
 
Acquisition of the material was performed by K.E. Sharpless. 
 
Support for the development of SRM 3282 was provided in part by NIH-ODS.  Technical consultation was provided 
by J.M. Betz (NIH-ODS). 
 
 

ertification

 
 

Gaithersburg, MD  20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  07 October 2019 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief  
Chemical Sciences Division 
 
Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

SRM 3282 

Page 1 of 6 

All 

Analytical measurements at NIST were performed by M.M. Phillips, M.A. Pichon, and L.J. Wood of the NIST 
Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Analyses  for  value  assignment  were  also  performed  by  the  following  laboratories  participating  in  a  Grocery 
Manufacturers  Association (GMA,  Washington, DC)  Food  Industry  Analytical  Chemists  Committee (FIACC) 
interlaboratory comparison exercise: Campbell Soup Company (Camden, NJ); Covance, Inc. (Madison, WI); Eurofins 
Scientific,  Inc.  (Des  Moines, IA);  Hormel  Foods  Corporation  (Austin, MN);  Krueger  Food  Laboratories, 
(Cambridge, MA); The Coca-Cola Company (Apopka, FL); and The National Food Laboratory (Livermore, CA). 
 
Statistical analysis was provided by J.H. Yen of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Office  of  Reference 
Support  aspects  involved  with  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
NOTICE TO USERS 
 
SRM 3282 IS INTENDED FOR RESEARCH USE; NOT FOR HUMAN CONSUMPTION. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
Handling:  This SRM is contained in tip-sealed borosilicate glass ampoules with prescored stems.  All appropriate 
safety precautions, including use of gloves during handling, should be taken.   
 
Opening  an  Ampoule:    When  an  ampoule  is  to  be  opened,  that  area  of  the  stem  where  the  prescored  band  is 
located should be carefully wiped with a clean, damp cloth and the body of the ampoule wrapped in absorbent material.  
Holding the ampoule steady and with thumb and forefinger grasping the stem, minimal thumb pressure should be 
applied to the stem to snap it.  Correctly done, the stem should break easily where prescored.  Use of a metal file to 
break the stem is NOT recommended. 
 
Storage:  The SRM should be stored under refrigeration (4 °C) in unopened ampoules. 
 
Use:  Prior to removal of a test portion, the contents of an ampoule should be mixed thoroughly.  To relate analytical 
determinations to the certified values in this certificate, a test portion mass equal to or greater than 0.1 g for organic 
acid analyses and 1.4 g for element analyses should be used.  The stability of organic acids and elements in opened 
ampoules has not been investigated.  Results obtained in analyses should include their own estimates of uncertainty 
and can be compared to the listed values using procedures described in reference 5. 
 
SOURCE, PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
Source and Preparation:  The low-calorie cranberry juice cocktail used for production of SRM 3282 was obtained 
from a commercial source.  The material was ampouled under argon at NIST. 
 
Analytical Approach for Determination of Organic Acids:  Value assignment of the mass fractions of organic acids 
in SRM 3282 was based on the combination of results provided by NIST using liquid chromatography with absorbance 
detection (LC-absorbance) and ion chromatography with conductivity detection (IC-CD). 
 
NIST Analysis for Organic Acids using LC-absorbance:  Mass fractions of citric acid, malic acid, quinic acid, and 
shikimic acid were measured by LC-absorbance using duplicate test portions of approximately 0.1 g taken from each 
of  six  ampoules.    Samples  were  diluted  with  a  solution  containing  potassium  phosphate  monobasic  and 
DL-dithiothreitol for stabilization prior to analysis.  An isocratic separation using two organic acid columns connected 
in series and an aqueous mobile phase adjusted to pH 2.0 with concentrated hydrochloric acid was used at 43 °C.  
Organic acids were detected by absorbance at 210 nm.  Quantification was based on an external calibration model [6]. 
 
NIST Analysis for Organic Acids and Anions using IC-CD:  Mass fractions of citric acid, malic acid, quinic acid, 
galacturonic acid, glycolic acid, isocitric acid, oxalic acid, phosphate, and sulfate were measured by IC-CD using 
duplicate test portions of approximately 0.1 g taken from each of six ampoules.  Samples were diluted with a solution 
containing potassium phosphate monobasic and DL-dithiothreitol for stabilization prior to analysis, and trifluoroacetic 
acid (TFA) was added as an internal standard.  A hydroxide-selective anion exchange column was held at 30 °C, and 

»mass  fractions 
iatography 

                                                           

(1) Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards 
ndards 
se.
and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
SRM 3282 

Page 2 of 6 

ultrapure water was used for generation of the hydroxide gradient.  A current of 186 mA was applied for suppression 
of the background conductivity from the hydroxide mobile phase for more sensitive detection of the organic acids [6].  
 
Analytical  Approach  for  Determination  of  Elements:  Value  assignment  of  the  mass  fractions  of  elements  in 
SRM 3282 was based on the combination of measurements made at NIST using inductively coupled plasma optical 
emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) and by collaborating laboratories, where appropriate. 
 
NIST Analyses for Ca, Cu, Fe, K, Mg, Mn, Na, and Zn using ICP-OES:  Mass fractions of calcium, copper, iron, 
potassium, magnesium, manganese, sodium, and zinc were measured by ICP-OES in nominal 1.4 g test portions taken 
from  each  of  six  ampoules  of  SRM 3282.    Test  portions  were  digested  in  sealed  vessels  with  nitric  acid  using  a 
microwave digestion system.  Quantification was based on the method of standard additions. 
 
Collaborating Laboratories’ Analyses:  The GMA FIACC collaborating laboratories were asked to use their usual 
methods to make single measurements of elements and sugars on single test portions taken from each of two ampoules 
of SRM 3282. 
 
Homogeneity Assessment:    The  homogeneity  of  organic  acids  and  elements  was  assessed  at  NIST  by  using  the 
methods described above.  An analysis of variance at the 5 % significance level did not show statistically significant 
heterogeneity.  All other analytes have been treated as though they are homogeneously distributed in the material 
although the homogeneity of the other analytes was not assessed. 
 
Value Assignment:  The equally weighted means from each set of data available were used to calculate the assigned 
values.  For calculation of assigned values for analytes that were measured only by NIST, the mean of the mean values 
from NIST results were used.  The collaborating laboratories reported the individual results for each of their analyses 
for a given analyte and the mean of each laboratory’s results was then determined.  For calculation of assigned values 
for analytes that were measured only by the collaborating laboratories, the median of the laboratory means was used.  
For analytes that were also measured by NIST, the mean of the individual sets of NIST data were averaged with the 
median of the individual collaborating laboratory means, as appropriate. 
 
Certified  Mass  Fraction  Values  for  Organic  Acids:    Each  certified  mass  fraction  value  is  the  mean  from  the 
combination of the means of results from analyses at NIST by LC-absorbance and IC-CD.  Values are expressed as 
x ± U95%(x), where x is the certified value and U95%(x) is the expanded uncertainty of the certified value.  The true 
value  of  the  analyte  is  believed  to  lie  within  the  interval  x ± U95%(x)  with  95 %  confidence.    To  propagate  this 
uncertainty, the certified value should be treated as a normally distributed random variable with mean x and standard 
deviation  U95%(x)/2 [2-4].    The  measurands  are  the  total  mass  fractions  of  the  organic  acids  as  listed  in  Table 1.  
Metrological traceability is to the measurement unit (expressed as milligrams per gram) as realized through the purity 
determined for the primary chemical standards employed in the NIST methods. 
 

Table 1.  Certified Mass Fraction Values for Organic Acids in SRM 3282 
 

 

Citric Acid  
Malic Acid 
Quinic Acid 

 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/g) 

3.221  ±  0.053 
2.133  ±  0.042 
2.672  ±  0.048 

 
 
 

 
 
 

SRM 3282 

Page 3 of 6 

Certified Mass Fraction Values for Elements:  Each certified mass fraction value is the combined mean from the 
mean of results from analyses at NIST using ICP-OES and the median of the mean of results provided by collaborating 
laboratories.  Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the certified value and U95%(x) is the expanded uncertainty 
of  the  certified  value.    The  true  value  of  the  analyte  is  believed  to  lie  within  the  interval  x ± U95%(x)  with  95 % 
confidence.   To  propagate  this  uncertainty, the  certified  value  should be  treated  as  a normally  distributed random 
variable with mean x and standard deviation U95%(x)/2 [2-4].  The measurands are the total mass fraction of elements 
in protein powder as listed in Table 2 on a dry-mass basis.  Metrological traceability is to the SI-derived unit for mass 
fraction (expressed as milligrams per kilogram). 
 
 

Table 2.  Certified Mass Fraction Values for Elements in SRM 3282 
 

Calcium (Ca) 
Copper (Cu) 
Magnesium (Mg) 
Manganese (Mn) 
Potassium (K) 
Sodium (Na) 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

26.3 
± 
0.231  ± 
12.97  ± 
0.493  ± 

1.6 
0.061 
0.84 
0.016 

247 
201 

±  12 
±  20 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Reference Mass Fraction Values for Organic Acids and Anions:  Each reference mass fraction value is the mean 
result  of  NIST  analyses.    Values  are  expressed  as  x ± U95%(x),  where  x  is  the  estimated  value  and  U95%(x)  is  the 
expanded uncertainty of the value.  The method-specific value of the analyte is believed to lie within the interval 
x ± U95%(x) with about a 95 % confidence [2-4].  The measurands are the total mass fractions of each analyte listed in 
Table 3 as determined by the methods indicated.  Metrological traceability is to mass fraction (expressed as milligrams 
per gram) as realized by the methods used. 
 

 
Table 3.  Reference Mass Fraction Values for Organic Acids and Anions in SRM 3282 
 

Galacturonic Acid(a)   
Glycolic Acid(a)   
Isocitric Acid(a)   
Oxalic Acid(a)   
Phosphate(a)   
Shikimic Acid(b)  
Sulfate(a)   
 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/g) 

0.3480  ±  0.0051 
0.0463  ±  0.0021 
0.0198  ±  0.0007 
0.0963  ±  0.0026 
0.0266  ±  0.0006 
0.051  ±  0.001 
0.0101  ±  0.0004 

(a) NIST IC-CD 
(b) NIST LC-absorbance 
 
 
 

 

SRM 3282 

Page 4 of 6 

Reference Mass Fraction Values for Elements:  Each reference mass fraction value is the mean result of NIST 
analyses by ICP-OES.  Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the reference value and U95%(x) is the expanded 
uncertainty of the value.  The method-specific value of the analyte is believed to lie within the interval x ± U95%(x) 
with about a 95 % confidence [2-4].  The measurands are the total mass fraction of each element listed in Table 4 as 
determined by the methods indicated.  Metrological traceability is to the SI-derived unit for mass fraction (expressed 
as milligrams per kilogram), as realized by the method used. 
 

 
Table 4.  Reference Mass Fraction Values for Elements in SRM 3282 
 

 

Iron (Fe)  
Zinc (Zn) 

Mass Fraction 
(mg/kg) 

 

 

0.54  ±  0.14 
0.154  ±  0.061 

 
 
Reference Mass  Fraction Values for  Sugars:   Each  reference  mass  fraction value  is  the  median of  the  mean of 
results provided by collaborating laboratories.  Values are expressed as x ± U95%(x), where x is the estimated value 
and U95%(x) is the expanded uncertainty of the value.  The method-specific value of the analyte is believed to lie within 
the  interval  x ± U95%(x)  with  about  a 95 %  confidence [2-4].   The  measurands  are  the  total  mass  fractions  of  each 
analyte  listed  in  Table 5  as  determined  by  the  methods  indicated.    Metrological  traceability  is  to  mass  fraction 
(expressed as grams per 100 grams) as realized by the methods used. 

 
Table 5.  Reference Mass Fraction Values for Sugars in SRM 3282 
 

 

Total Sugars  
Fructose  
Glucose  

Mass Fraction 
(g/100 g) 

2.862  ±  0.054 
2.08  ±  0.10 
0.850  ±  0.060 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

SRM 3282 

Page 5 of 6 

DC 

[4]  

Office: 

(2000); 

available 

Washington, 

REFERENCES 
 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment 
of  Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136;  U.S.  Government 
Printing 
at 
https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/srm/SP260-136.PDF (accessed Oct 2019). 
JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections); Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (2008); available at available 
at:  https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  Oct  2019);  see 
also  Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST 
Measurement Results; NIST Technical Note 1297; U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (1994); 
available at https://www.nist.gov/pml/nist-technical-note-1297 (accessed Oct 2019). 
JCGM 101:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data – Supplement 1 to the Guide to Expression of Uncertainty 
in Measurement; Propagation of Distributions Using a Monte Carlo Method; Joint Committee for Guides in 
Metrology;  International  Bureau  of  Weights  and  Measures (BIPM),  Sèvres, France  (2008);  available  at 
https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf (accessed Oct 2019). 
Efron, B.; Tibshirani, R. J.; An Introduction to the Bootstrap, Chapman & Hall, London, UK (1993). 
Sharpless, K.E.; Lippa, K.A.; Duewer, D.L.; Rukhin, A.L.; The ABCs of Using Standard Reference Materials 
in the Analysis of Foods and Dietary Supplements: A Practical Guide; NIST Special Publication 260-181r1; 
U.S. 
at 
https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/srm/SP260-181r1-2.pdf (accessed Oct 2019).  
Phillips, M.M.;  Case, R.J.;  Rimmer, C.A.;  Sharpless, K.E.;  Wise, S.A.;  Sander, L.C.;  Determination  of 
Organic  Acids  in  Vaccinium  Berry  Standard  Reference  Materials;  Anal.  Bioanal.  Chem.,  Vol. 398,  
pp. 425–434 (2010). 

Washington, 

Government 

available 

Printing 

(2014); 

Office: 

[4] 
[5] 

DC 

[6] 

[3] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
‘ainty  updated  for 
Certificate Revision History:  07 October 2019 (Removal of ascorbic acid reference value due to instability; discussion of uncertainty updated for 
all values, including removal of k values; editorial changes); 28 March 2016 (Change of expiration date; significant figures added to copper value; 
   
editorial changes); 14 September 2010 (Original certificate date). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program:    telephone  (301)  975-2200;  fax  (301)  948-3730;  e-mail 
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

> 

SRM 3282 

Page 6 of 6 

