This:  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  in  the  form  of  a  fine,  water-atomized  powder  and  is  intended  for  use 
canilfine 
in  calibrating  instruments  used  in  the  determination  of  carbon  and  sulfur. 

a  Antosemsimatenen  af  nnehanm  and 

mating  ine 

oan  cat 

National  Institute  of  Standards  &  Cerhnology 

Gerlificale  of  Analysis 

Standard  Reference  Material  338 

White  Cast  Iron 

(In  Cooperation  with  the  American  Society  for  Testing  and  Materials) 

Certified 
Value,  wt  %!* 

Estimated 
Uncertainty? 

Labs 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 

Total  Carbon 

3.33 

0.02 

3.32 
3.49 
3.37 
3.33 
3.34 

Sulfur 

0.015 

0.002 

0.013 
0.014 
0.017 
0.016 
0.015 

“wt  %  =  mg/kg  x  10% 

The  certified  value  listed  for  a  constituent is  the  present  bes. 

 Oo 

y
a

the  cooperative  program  for  certification. 
2  The  estimated  uncertainty  is  based  on  judgment  and  represents  an  evaluation  of  the  combined  effects  of  method 
imprecision,  possible  systematic  errors  among  methods,  and  material  variability  of  samples  of  0.5  g  or  more.  (No 
attempt  was  made  to  derive  exact  statistical  measures  of  imprecision  because  several  methods  were  involved  in  the 
determination  of  the  constituents.) 

The  overall  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  certification  were  performed  under  the  direction 
of  J.I.  Shultz,  Research  Associate,  ASTM/NIST  Research  Associate  Program. 

This  Certificate  of Analysis  has  undergone  editorial  revision  to  reflect  program  and  organizational  changes  at  NIST 
and  at  the  Department  of  Commerce.  No  attempt  was  made  to  reevaluate  the  certificate  values  or  any  technical  data 
presented  in  this  certificate. 

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  original  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  SRM  were 
Revision  of 
coordinated  through  the  Standard  Reference  Materials  Program  by  R.E.  Michaelis  and  W.P.  Reed. 
this  certificate  was  coordinated  through  the  Standard  Reference  Materials  Program  by  P.A.  Lundberg. 

Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 
May  17,  1993 
(Revision  of  certificate  dated  6-24-82) 

Thomas  E.  Gills,  Acting  Chief 
Standard  Reference  Materials  Program 

  

  

(over)

PLANNING,  PREPARATION,  TESTING,  ANALYSIS 

The  material  for  this  SRM,  in  the  form  of  small  castings,  was  furnished  to  NIST  gratis,  courtesy  of  R.  Nelson, 
Thomas  Foundaries,  Inc.,  Birmingham,  AL. 
Under  contract  with  NIST,  the  castings  were  remelted  and  water- 
atomized  to  fine  size  granules  at  the  Hoeganaes  Corp.,  Riverton,  NJ.  Following  a  sieve  fraction/composition  study 
at  NIST,  the  entire  lot  was  sieved  and  those  particles  sized  between  0.045  and  0.10  mm  sieve  openings  (325  and 
145  mesh)  were  accepted  for  use  as  SRM  338. 

Homogeneity  testing  was  performed  by  E.R.  Deardorff  and  B.I.  Diamondstone  of  the  NIST  Inorganic  Analytical 
Research  Division,  and  by  R.K.  Bell,  ASTM  Assistant  Research  Associate.  The  material  was  determined  to  be  of 
exceptionally  high  homogeneity,  with  the  material  variability  being  well  within  the  imprecision  of  the  analytical 
methods. 

Cooperative  analyses  for  certification  were  performed  in  the  following  laboratories: 

American  Cast  Iron  Pipe  Company,  Birmingham,  AL,  R.N.  Smith,  L.J.  Moore,  and  D.R.  Denney. 

Foster  Wheeler  Development  Corporation,  Research  Center,  Livingston,  NJ,  M.  Fornoff. 

Johnson  Brass  and  Machine  Foundry,  Saukville,  WI,  D.C.  Marshall. 

National  Institute  of  Standards  &  Technology,  Inorganic  Analytical  Research  Division,  Gaithersburg,  MD,  B.I. 
Diamondstone  and  R.K.  Bell,  ASTM/NIST  Research  Associate  Program. 

U.S.  Bureau  of  Mines,  Albany  Research  Center,  Albany,  OR,  A.J.  Mackie,  D.  Bollman  and  R.  Farrell. 

SUPPLEMENTAL  INFORMATION 

Although  not  certified,  additional  information  on  the  composition  is  given  below. 

Element 

Mn 
Pp 
Si 
Cu 
Ni 
Cr 

Vv 
Co 

wt % 

(0.76) 
(0.054) 
(1.82) 
(0.27) 
(5.5) 
(  10.2) 
(0.04) 
(0.32)

