ENT  OF  C, 

Stares  oF 

hy 

 
e
y
 
%
0
3

 
.
a
c
 M

,
 %
y
o
"

 
,
p
E

 
*

 
t
o

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Report of Investigation 
 
Reference Material 8011 
 
Gold Nanoparticles 
(Nominal 10 nm Diameter) 

nment 

validity. 

nent,  processing 

 
This  Reference  Material (RM)  is  intended  primarily  to  evaluate  and  qualify  methodology  and/or  instrument 
performance for the physical/dimensional characterization of primary nanoscale particles.  The suspension contains 
primary  particles (monomers)  and  clusters  of  primary  particles.    RM 8011  consists  of  nominally  5 mL  of  citrate-
stabilized  Gold  (Au)  nanoparticles  in  an  aqueous  suspension,  supplied  in  hermetically  sealed  pre-scored  glass 
ampoules sterilized by gamma irradiation.  A unit of RM 8011 consists of two 5 mL ampoules.   
 
Limitations of Use:  RM 8011 has been determined to contain clusters and larger aggregates of primary particles and 
the use is limited to methods that measure primary particle size. These methods are listed in Table 1 below.  RM 8011 
is not suitable for use with ensemble methods that are affected by the presence of aggregates. 
 
Expiration of Value Assignment:  The reference values for RM 8011 are valid, within the measurement uncertainty 
ce  with  the  instructions  given  in 
specified, until 25 October 2020, provided the RM is handled and stored in accordance with the instructions given in 
this  report (see  “Notice  and  Warning  to  Users”).   This  report  is  nullified  if  the  RM  is  damaged,  contaminated,  or 
otherwise modified. 
 
If  substantive  technical  changes
Maintenance of RM:  NIST will monitor this RM over the period of its validity.  If substantive technical changes 
occur  that  affect  the  reference  values  before  the  expiration  of  this  report,  NIST  will  notify  the  purchaser.  
Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Overall technical coordination for material procurement, processing, and measurement activities was conducted by 
V.A. Hackley and J.F. Kelly of the NIST division formerly known as the Ceramics Division. 
 
Reference and informational value measurements were performed at NIST by the following: T.A. Butler, R. Case, 
K.W. Pratt,  L.C. Sander,  M.R. Winchester,  A.J. Allen,  T.J. Cho, 
J. Grobelny,  V.A. Hackley,  D.-I. Kim, 
P. Namboodiri,  J.E. Bonevich,  A.J. Shapiro,  M.L. Becker,  D.L. Ho,  A. Karim,  B.M. Vogel,  B. Ming,  A.E. Vladár, 
L.F. Pease III, M.J. Tarlov, D.H. Tsai, M.R. Zachariah, and R.A. Zangmeister. 
 
Statistical consultation on measurement design and analysis of the reference value data were performed by A.I. Avilés 
of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Additional  technical  and  coordination  aspects  were  provided  by  the  following:  R.F. Cook,  W.K. Haller  and 
D.L. Kaiser of the NIST Materials Measurement Science Division. 
 
Support aspects involved in the issuance of this RM were coordinated through the NIST Office of Reference Materials. 
 
RM 8011 was developed at the request of the National Cancer Institute (NCI).  Development and production costs 
were subsidized by NCI. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Report Issue Date:  03 December 2018 
Report Revision History on Last Page 
 

John A. Small, Chief 
Materials Measurement Science Division 

Steven J. Choquette, Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

nt  Science  Division 

terly  known  as  the 

 

RM 8011  

  

  

Page 1 of 8 

Reference  Values:  Reference  values  are  a  best  estimate  of  the  true  value  provided  by  NIST  where  all  known  or 
suspected sources of bias have not been fully investigated by NIST [1].  Dimensional reference values (mean particle 
diameter  in  solution,  as  an  aerosol  and  deposited  on  a  substrate)  are  reported  and  are  based  on  the  following 
measurement  techniques:  atomic  force  microscopy (AFM),  scanning  electron  microscopy (SEM),  transmission 
electron microscopy (TEM) and electrospray-differential mobility analysis (ES-DMA).  The corresponding reference 
values and expanded uncertainties are provided in Table 1.  A synopsis of the methods used to generate reference 
values is provided starting on page 6.  The measurands are the particle size based on the indicated methods.  The 
reference values are metrologically traceable to the SI unit for length, expressed as nanometers. 
 
 

a)
Table 1. Reference Value Mean Size and Expanded Uncertainty (a) 
Average Particle Size (Diameter), in nanometers 

 

Technique 

Analyte Form 

Particle Size 
(nm) 

Atomic Force Microscopy 
Scanning Electron Microscopy 
Transmission Electron Microscopy 
Differential Mobility Analysis 

dry, deposited on substrate 
dry, deposited on substrate 
dry, deposited on substrate 
dry, aerosol 

8.5  ± 
 
9.9  ± 
 
 
8.9  ± 
  11.3  ± 

0.3 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 

(a)  The expanded uncertainties, U, are calculated as U = kuc, where uc is intended to represent, at the level of one standard deviation, 
the combined standard uncertainty calculated according to the ISO/JCGM Guide [2].  The coverage factor, k, for 95 % expanded 
uncertainty intervals is based on a t multiplier with the appropriate associated degrees of freedom. 

 
 
Information Values: Additional measurements and data were obtained to further characterize the material and are 
provided  as  information  values.    NIST  information  values  are  considered  to  be  of  interest  to  the  RM  user,  but 
insufficient information is available to assess adequately the uncertainty associated with the values or a limited number 
of  analyses  were  performed.    Information  values  and  associated  measurement  uncertainties  for  chemical  and 
electrochemical  properties  unrelated  to  particle  size  are  presented  in  Table 2.    An  optical  absorbance  spectrum  is 
provided in Figure 1.  Material sterility was assessed.  Electron microscopy images are provided in Figure 3. Particle 
size histograms are provided in Figures 4 through 7.  Information values cannot be used to establish  metrological 
traceability. 
 
 

 

RM 8011 

Page 2 of 8 

 

Table 2.  Information Value Mean and Measurement Uncertainty(a) 
Chemical and Electrochemical Properties 

Measurement 

Value 

Au mass fraction (μg g-1) (b) 
Cl− ion mass fraction (μg g-1) (c) 
citrate ion mass fraction (μg g-1) (c) 
Na mass fraction (μg g-1) (d) 
pH (e) 
electrolytic conductivity, κ (μS cm-1) (f) 
zeta potential (mV) (g) 

 
 
 

 
 

51.56  ± 
± 
35.0 
± 
1.7 
95 
7.19  ± 
± 
-- 

417.9 

0.23 
4.6 
0.4 

0.33 
7.2 

(a) For pH, conductivity and Au mass fraction, the expanded uncertainty (95 % confidence interval) is calculated according to the 

ISO/JCGM Guide [2].  Other reported uncertainties are two times the standard deviation of replicate measurements. 

two  times  the  standard  deviation  of 

(b) Au bound into nanoparticles was determined from separate measurements of total Au and Au dissolved in the solution matrix.  
Both  measurements  were  made  using  inductively-coupled  plasma  optical  emission  spectrometry (ICP-OES).    Total  Au  was 
measured after digestion of the particles with a mixture of nitric and hydrochloric acids.  Solution matrix Au was measured after 
removal of Au particles by ultracentrifugation and was undetectable at the 3σ detection limit corresponding to 0.07 μg g-1 in the 
undiluted supernatant.  The Au mass fraction in the matrix was estimated as 0.5 time the 3σ limit and subtracted from the total 
Au mass fraction to obtain the reported value for the bound Au mass fraction. 

(c) Levels  of  Cl−  and  citrate (C3H5O(COO)33−)  ions  were  determined  in  native  suspensions  by  ion  chromatography  with  a 
conductivity detector.  Chloride and citrate ions were identified based on the retention times of reference standards.  Chloride 
levels in the water blank used to prepare calibrants were insignificant for this analysis.  Citrate was not detectable in the water 
blank.  The levels of Cl− and citrate ions appear to increase slightly as a consequence of centrifugation, but this effect has not 
been quantified.  Citrate bound to Au particles will not be detected by this approach. 

(d) Na mass fraction was determined in the native suspension using inductively-coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-
OES).  Matrix effects and other factors that may affect metrological validity are unaccounted for in this case.  Additionally, Na 
may leach into solution from the inner surfaces of borosilicate glass ampoules.  Ongoing studies at NIST have shown that Na 
mass fractions in excess of 10 μg g-1 may result under acidic conditions.  The proportion of the observed Na mass fraction that 
is attributable to leaching is unknown. Furthermore, changes in the Na mass fraction over time are unpredictable. 

(e) The  pH  was  determined  at  25.0 °C  using  a  combination  electrode  with  ceramic  reference  junction  and  a 2 point  calibration 

referred to SRM 186g (pH 6.864) and SRM 187e (pH 9.186).  

(f) Electrolytic conductivity was determined at 25.0 °C at 1 kHz using a dip cell with nominal cell constant of 0.1 cm-1.  The cell 

constant was determined using SRM 3191 (nominal κ, 100 µS cm-1) and SRM 3192 (nominal κ, 500 µS cm-1). 

(g) Possibly due to the small particle size of RM 8011, zeta potential results obtained by Doppler velocimetry were of insufficient 
quality and precision to permit reporting.  Results were sufficient only to confirm the Au particles carry a net negative charge. 

 
 
Optical Absorbance:  Optical absorbance spectra were obtained using a double-beam spectrophotometer on native 
suspensions.  Measurements were performed using matched quartz cuvettes (10 mm path length) against a filtered 
deionized  water  reference.    Scan  conditions  were:  slit  width,  1 nm;  scan  rate,  240 nm  min-1.    The  coefficient  of 
variation  determined  near  the  plasmonic  peak  center  was  0.2 %  for  spectra  obtained  from  6  randomly  selected 
ampoules.  A representative spectrum is presented in Figure 1. 

517 nm

e
c
n
a
b
r
o
s
b
a

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

  

 

 

RM 8011 

 

400

450

500

550

600

650

700

Figure 1. Representative optical absorbance spectrum for the native suspension, centered on 
the surface plasmon resonance peak for Au.  Wavelength at peak maximum is indicated.  

wavelength (nm)

 

Page 3 of 8 

Sterility  and  Endotoxin  Assessment(1):  Sterility  was  tested  by  plating  RM 8011  on  standard  Luria-Bertani (LB) 
culture plates.  No colony formation was observed after two days of incubation on LB plates for samples taken from 
ampoules before or after sterilization with gamma radiation.  Endotoxin levels were not assessed due to interference 
from Au particles in the colorimetric detection used for the assay.( 2) 
 
Electron Microscopy Imaging: Representative micrographs are presented in Figure 2. 

 
 

 
Figure 2. TEM micrographs. On left: image of Au particles sampled from a single representative TEM image.  On 
right: high magnification TEM image revealing internal structure and faceting of a single Au particle. 
 
analysis 
Size Distribution Histograms:  Histograms generated by AFM, SEM, TEM and ES-DMA (single particle analysis 
methods) are shown below in Figures 3, 4, 5 and 6, respectively.  Histograms reflect the primary particle size 
Binning  was  performed  at 
distribution and do not necessarily reflect the presence of aggregates or potential artifacts. Binning was performed at 
a resolution of approximately 5 bin nm-1. 

 

t
n
u
o
c

50

40

30

20

10

0

 
 

5

t
n
u
o
c

 
 

7

6

8

9

 
  

  

 

18

15

12

9

6

3

0

10

11

12

13

14

15

size (nm)

Figure 3. Particle size histogram generated by AFM analysis. 

 

 

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

Figure 4. Particle size histogram generated by SEM analysis. 

size (nm)

                                                 

equately  specify  the
(1) Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  report  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 

(2) The limulus amoebocyte lysate (LAL) assay was used to detect and measure bacterial endotoxin.  Due to interference at 
the wavelength (405 nm) used to quantify the results of the underlying enzymatic reaction, Au particles must be removed from the 
solution by centrifugation prior to analysis.  RM 8011 could not be adequately clarified by centrifugation at 20,000 g.  Assays 
carried out on Au suspensions processed in an identical manner and from the same commercial source, but with larger particle 
sizes, resulted in no detectable endotoxin at a level of 2 pg mL-1. 
RM 8011 

Page 4 of 8 

t
n
u
o
c

600

450

300

150

0

 
 

)

6
0
1
 
x
(
 
t

n
u
o
c

4

3

2

1

0

6

9

8

5

7

 
  

 
 

 

10

11

12

13

14

15

size (nm)

Figure 5. Particle size histogram generated by TEM analysis. 

 

 

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

size (nm)

Figure  6.  Particle  size  histogram  generated  by  ES-DMA  analysis.    Bins  containing  counts 
attributable to salt particles have been removed. 
 

:  allowed  to  freeze 

 
NOTICE AND WARNING TO USERS 
 
Caution:  Ampoule contents should not be allowed to freeze, as this will permanently compromise the integrity of 
the material and invalidate reference values. A color change from red‐pink to purple or clear indicates that the RM 
‘cates  that  the  RM 
has been compromised. Occasionally, a visible black speck will be observed in an ampoule containing an otherwise 
translucent red‐pink (i.e., normal) solution; this does not indicate the sample has been compromised; the specks settle 
ttle 
rapidly and can easily be separated from the test material. 
 
Warning: Not for clinical use or human consumption. 
 
ING,  STORAGE,  AND  USE
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
Handling and Storage:  Until required for use, the RM should be stored at room temperature in its original ampoule 
and  package  and  protected  from  intense  direct  light  or  ultraviolet  radiation.    Refrigeration  is  not  necessary  and  is 
discouraged.  Ampoules are best stored long term in a horizontal position. 
 
Use:    Prior  to  opening,  the  glass  ampoule  containing  the  RM  should  be  gently  inverted  several  times  to  insure 
homogeneity  and  resuspension  of  any  settled  particles.    Liquid  retained  in  the  upper  portion  of  the  ampoule (the 
nipple), can be dislodged by gently flicking the nipple with forefinger while tilting the ampoule.  The ampoule is pre-
scored  and  should  be  opened  by  applying  moderate  pressure  with  one’s  thumb  to  snap  off  the  nipple.    It  is 
recommended that the contents of an ampoule be used the same day as opened.  Clean laboratory sealing film can be 
applied to seal a previously opened ampoule for short term storage.  If it is necessary to use an ampoule over two or 
more  days,  then  certain  precautions  should  be  taken:  opening  the  ampoule  in  a  clean  bench (HEPA  filtered) 
environment  using  sterile  procedures (ethanol  rinse),  and  sealing  with  ethanol-rinsed 
laboratory  sealing 
film (optionally, one can transfer the suspension to a clean, sterile plastic or glass vial with a sealing cap), should 
prolong the useful life of opened ampoules for up to 7 days.  Viability after longer term storage cannot be guaranteed 
but may be possible if these additional precautions are followed. 
 

RM 8011 

Page 5 of 8 

PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS 
 
Material Source and Processing:  The material used to produce RM 8011 was purchased from BB International of 
Cardiff, UK.  A colloidal Au suspension was prepared to NIST specifications using the citrate-reduction method in a 
single 8 L batch at their manufacturing facility in the UK.  The suspension was shipped in 1 L polycarbonate bottles 
and recombined at NIST in a sterile protein-free 10 L borosilicate glass flask.  Recombination was performed in a 
HEPA-filtered clean bench using sterile procedures.  The suspension was subsequently flame-sealed into Wheaton 
5 mL pre-scored USP Type I glass ampoules using an automated process.  Prior to use, the ampoules were cleaned 
with high pressure deionized water and autoclaved, then flushed with argon gas prior to and during filling.  The sealed 
ampoules  containing  the  Au  suspension  were  sterilized  with  cobalt-60  gamma  radiation  to  a  minimum  dose  of 
31.9 kGy by Neutron Products Inc. of Dickerson, MD. 
 
Heterogeneity Assessment:  During the filling process, ampoules were stored in boxes numbered 1 through 11, with 
box  number  corresponding  to  fill  order.    Heterogeneity  testing  was  performed  using  measurements  of  optical 
density (OD) at 520 nm, hydrodynamic size, and relative Au mass fraction.  Measurements of OD and hydrodynamic 
size (determined  by  dynamic  light  scattering),  were  performed  on  native  solutions.    For  these  measurements,  two 
samples were extracted from each of 11 randomly selected ampoules (one from each box), for a total of 22 samples 
for each method.  Both likelihood ratio [3] (to check if a model that ignores the ampoule effect and a model with the 
ampoule effect are similar) and ANOVA [3] tests conclude that ampoules are homogeneous for hydrodynamic size.  
Likelihood ratio indicates an apparent relationship between box number and OD (and thus statistical evidence exists 
to claim the models are not similar), but ANOVA indicates there is no significant ampoule effect.  It is concluded that 
the engineering significance of the difference is negligible. 
 
Au content was evaluated using inductively-coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry performed on 4 samples 
extracted  gravimetrically  from  each  of  11  randomly  selected  ampoules (one  from  each  box).    Analysis  followed 
addition of an internal standard, acid digestion, and dilution with high-purity water.  Relative Au mass fraction was 
calculated  as  relative  instrument  sensitivity  values.    ANOVA  suggests  that  ampoules  are  different  for  a  level  of 
confidence of 95 %.  It should be noted that the magnitudes of the observed heterogeneities are probably negligible in 
relation to the intended use of this material, since the largest and smallest ICP-OES relative sensitivity values differ 
by approximately 0.4 %.  Likelihood ratio concludes that the ampoules are homogeneous. 
 
Value Assignment and Uncertainty Analysis:  Analyses to establish reference values were conducted at NIST using 
best  practices  as  determined  independently  for  each  measurement  method.    Analyses  were  performed  on 
replicate (typically two) subsamples drawn from randomly selected (typically four) ampoules of material; subsample 
sizes and methods were left to the discretion of the expert analyst.  For AFM, the reference value is the mean of the 
measurement  results,  and  the  95  %  expanded  uncertainty  interval  was  obtained  by  applying  the  BoB (Type  B  on 
Biased) approach [4], using a rectangular distribution.  For SEM, the reference value is the mean of the measurement 
results  and  the  uncertainty  level  is  based  on  a  confidence  interval  approach [2],  with  an  expanded  uncertainty 
calculated as U = kuc, where the combined uncertainty (uc) is calculated as the estimated standard deviation of the 
mean and the coverage factor (k) is the expansion factor of 2 based on the Student’s t multiplier associated with a level 
of confidence of 95 %.  For TEM and ES-DMA, reference values were calculated from the ampoule means and the 
uncertainty level is based on a prediction interval approach [5], where the combined uncertainty is calculated as the 
(N  is  the  number  of  ampoules  analyzed)  and  the 
standard  deviation  of  the  ampoule  means  multiplied  by 

N11 +

coverage factor is based on a t multiplier with N-1 degrees of freedom, for a 95 % expanded uncertainty interval.   
 
METHODS FOR REFERENCE VALUE MEASUREMENTS 
 
Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM):  AFM probes the surface forces between a cantilever tip and the sample deposited 
on a flat substrate.  The tip is rastered over the analysis area producing a 3D topographic image. Height measurements 
can  be  obtained  with  sub-nanometer  precision.    A  Veeco  Multimode  AFM  was  used  for  measurements.    Height 
measurements were calibrated using a silicon step-height transfer artifact (SH70-C19-R19) with a value of 68.9 nm ± 
0.7 nm (NIST Calibrated-AFM, Precision Engineering Division) following the prescribed procedure for calibration.  
Intermediate contact (“tapping”)  mode was used  with a Veeco RTESP phosphorus (n) doped silicon cantilever for 
imaging (resonance frequency 300 kHz, spring constant 40 N m-1).  Atomically flat polycrystalline Au on mica was 
used as a substrate in order to provide a consistent baseline for size measurements with minimal interference from 
surface roughness. 
 
To prepare samples for analysis, approximately 1 mL aliquots of native suspension from 2 randomly selected ampoules 
were placed into 1.5 mL microtubes and centrifuged at 14 krpm for 20 min.  A portion of the supernatant from each 
microtube was then removed and replaced with deionized water to obtain an 8-fold dilution of the native suspension.  
No change in stability of the suspension was observed during this process. A droplet of each diluted suspension was 
then placed on the Au substrate and dried at 70 °C.  The maximum height with reference to the baseline substrate was 

RM 8011 

Page 6 of 8 

)  particles  from  the 

deposited 
recorded  as  the  size (diameter)  of  the  Au  particle.    Images  were  collected  from  different  areas  of  the  deposited 
substrate.  Height profiles representing 300 particles from one ampoule and 100 particles from the second ampoule 
were individually analyzed to acquire the size distribution and mean. 
 
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM):  In SEM the sample is imaged using low-energy secondary electrons in a 
process that employs a raster-scanned primary beam.  An FEI Helios Dual-Beam SEM was used for imaging, with the 
following conditions: 15 keV accelerating voltage, 86 pA beam current, 30 μs beam dwell time for each image pixel, 
and 3.5 mm sample working distance.  Image contrast and brightness were set so that a good balance between detail 
and  distinction  from  background  was  achieved.    For  scale  calibrations  of  X  and  Y  directions  a  VLSI  Standards 
NanoLattice sample was used.  This artifact was calibrated on NIST’s Calibrated Atomic Force Microscope (C-AFM) 
by  R.G.  Dixson  of  the  NIST  Precision  Engineering  Division,  who  determined  a  pitch  value  of  99.98  nm  with  an 
uncertainty of 1.5 nm (k = 2).  Samples were imaged at 500 k× magnification. A digital capture resolution of (2048 × 
1886)  pixels  was  used  for  all  images.    Under  these  conditions,  a  nominal  10  nm  particle  will  yield  an  area  of 
roughly (35 × 35) pixels. 
 
http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/)  was
The software package ImageJ v1.37 (available from the National Institutes of Health: http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/) was 
used for image processing and data analysis.  The Otsu threshold algorithm was implemented to produce a binary 
image in which the particles are white and the background is black.  The outlines of particles as traced by ImageJ were 
used to check the quality of the particle separation from their background in order to discriminate between single 
particles and aggregates.  The area data for each numbered particle as obtained from ImageJ were first converted to 
an effective spherical diameter value in pixel units, which was then converted to length units (nm) based on the pitch 
calibration.  A total of 140 particles were analyzed on samples prepared from 2 randomly selected ampoules. 
 
Substrates were prepared by placing a drop of aminopropyldimethylethoxysilane (ADMES) on a clean 5 mm × 5 mm 
Si substrate cleaved from a 100 mm diameter wafer.  The untreated wafer supports a thin, native oxide layer. The 
ADMES was allowed to react for 2 h to 6 h, after which excess silane was rinsed off with isopropanol followed by 
deionized water.  For analysis, the Au particles were then deposited onto the derivatized substrate by contacting with 
a droplet of native suspension for a period of 1 h to 2 h.  The deposited substrate was then rinsed with isopropanol 
followed by deionized water, and dried by gently blowing with filtered dry nitrogen prior to analysis.  Samples were 
analyzed as deposited; a conductive coating was not required. 
 
Transmission  Electron  Microscopy (TEM):    TEM  measures  the  projected  image  of  particles  deposited  onto  an 
electron-transparent  substrate.  Internal  structure,  as  well  as  surface  morphology,  may  contribute  to  the  image 
appearance.  A Philips EM400T TEM, operating at 120 kV and equipped with an Olympus Cantega bottom mount 
CCD camera, was used for measurement of deposited samples.  Frames were captured at an exposure time of 2 s.  The 
magnification of the microscope/camera system was calibrated using negatively stained catalase crystals and analyzed 
by 
the 
IgorPro (http://www.wavemetrics.com/) software package using custom macros written by B.M. Vogel of the NIST 
Polymers  Division.    Particle  size  was  determined  by  measuring  the  contiguous  area  of  pixels  that  fall  within  the 
threshold set for a particular micrograph.  This area was then used to determine the equivalent diameter assuming a 
spherical particle.  Therefore, the average particle size does not consider any pronounced faceting.  The circularity 
Aπ  (where  P  is  the  particle  perimeter  and  A  is  its  area),  approaches  1  for  an  ideal  circle. 
value,  defined  as 
Particles with circularities of 6 or higher were not counted, in order to minimize aggregate/artifact inclusion in the 
size analysis. 
 
The substrate consisted of a 3 mm Cu grid with a 10 nm continuous film of silicon monoxide that was functionalized 
with aminopropydimethylethoxysilane (ADMES).  The substrate was prepared by contacting a commercial grid with 
about 20 µL of ADMES while sealed in a glass vial to trap vapor and prevent evaporation.  After 1 h, the grids were 
removed and dip-washed in ethanol and allowed to dry.  To prepare a sample for analysis, one droplet (roughly 8 µL) 
of  native  Au  suspension  was  placed  on  a  functionalized  grid  presented  on  a  stud  suspended  above  a  reservoir 
containing water.  A cover was placed over the assembly to prevent evaporation of the Au suspension. After 1 h the 
grids were dip-washed in distilled water and then ethanol to remove any remaining suspension.  The grids were then 
dried at room temperature prior to measurement.  A total of 5098 particles  were analyzed on grids prepared from 
4 randomly selected ampoules. 
 
Electrospray – Differential Mobility Analysis (ES-DMA):  In ES-DMA the liquid suspension is first conveyed into 
the  gas  phase  using  electrospray  ionization.    The  resulting  droplets  pass  through  a  neutralizing  chamber  where 
collisions with charged ions reduce the charge to a modified Boltzmann distribution [6].  Consequently, most of the 
positively charged particles left after the droplets evaporate possess a single net charge.  As they dry, residual salts or 
other  nonvolatile  impurities  encrust  the  surface.    Within  the  analysis  chamber  charged  particles  are  attracted  to  a 
negatively biased center electrode, while being dragged along by a carrier gas.  Particles for which the electrical force 
balances  the  drag  force  pass  through  a  collection  slit,  after  which  a  condensation  particle  counter  enumerates  the 

the  CRISP  software  package (http://www.calidris-em.com/). 

images  were  analyzed 

  TEM 

2 4P

in 

RM 8011 

Page 7 of 8 

number of particles passing through the detector per cubic centimeter of gas flow.  Stepping through the voltage yields 
a  particle  size  distribution.    The  experimental  system  used  in  this  study  consisted  of  an  electrospray  aerosol 
generator (Model 3480, TSI Inc.), a differential mobility analyzer (Model 3080n, TSI Inc.) and a condensation particle 
counter (Model  3025,  TSI  Inc.).    The  following  conditions  were  used:  capillary  diameter,  nominally  25 μm; 
electrospray voltage, 1.67 kV to 2.78 kV; CO2 pressure and flow rate, 6.89 × 104 Pa and 0.2 L min-1; air pressure and 
flow  rate,  2.55 × 104 Pa  and  1.0 L min-1;  sheath/carrier  gas  flow  rate,  30  L min-1;  flow  entering  the  particle 
counter (supplemented by filtered air), 1.5 L min-1.  The baseline cut off value was set at 30 counts to ensure clear 
separation between peaks and to account for baseline noise. 
 
Conversion of DMA voltages to equivalent diameters and generation of the particle size distribution were achieved 
using equations and parameters specified by the commercial vendor of the ES-DMA instrumentation.  To account for 
the thickness of any nonvolatile salts encrusted on the surface of the particles, the mode diameter of the salt peak was 
determined and subtracted from the subsequent particle sizes, after which the number average diameter was calculated 
for each sample. 
 
From each of 4 randomly selected ampoules, 900 μL of native suspension was transferred to low-binding microfuge 
tubes and centrifuged for 40  min at 13.2 krpm.  The clear supernatant was removed, leaving 20 μL to 30 μL of material 
to  which  was  added  500 μL  of  2 mmol L-1  ammonium  acetate  solution  at  pH 8.    A  vortex  mixer  was  used  to  re-
homogenize samples, which were then subjected to ES-DMA.  
 
 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]   May, W.; Parris, R.; Beck II, C; Fassett, J.; Greenberg, R.; Guenther, F.; Kramer, G.; Wise, S.; Gills, T.; Colbert, J.; 
Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definitions of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of Reference 
Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136;  U.S. Government  Printing  Office:  
Washington, DC (2000); available at: https://www.nist.gov/srm/publications.cfm (accessed Dec 2018). 

[2]   JCGM 100:2008;  Evaluation  of  Measurement  Data  -  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in 
Measurement; (GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections), Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (JCGM) (2008); 
https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf (accessed 
available 
Dec 2018); see also Taylor, B.N.; Kuyatt, C.E.; Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of 
NIST  Measurement  Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office: 
Washington, DC (1994); available at https://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed Dec 2018). 

at 

[3]   Tamhane, A.C.; Dunlop, D.D.; Statistics and Data Analysis: From Elementary to Intermediate; 1st ed., Prentice 

Hall: Englewood Cliffs, NJ (2000). 

[4]   Levenson, L.M.; Banks, D.L.; Eberhardt, K.R.; Gill, M.S.; Guthrie, W.F.; Liu, H.K.; Vangel, M.G.; Yen, J.H.; 
Zhang, N.F.; An Approach to Combining Results From Multiple Methods Motivated by the ISO GUM; J. Res. 
Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., Vol. 105, pp. 571-579 (2000). 

[5]   Neter, J.; Kutner, M.H.; Nachtsheim, C.J.; Wasserman, W.; Applied Linear Statistical Models; 4th ed., Irwin: 

Chicago, IL (1996). 

[6]   Mulholland, G.W.; Donnelly, M.K.; Hagwood, C.R.; Kukuck, S.R.; Hackley, V.A.; Pui, D.Y.H.; Measurement 
of 100 nm and 60 nm Particle Standards by Differential Mobility Analysis; J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., 
Vol. 111, pp. 257-312 (2006). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report Revision History:  03 December 2018 (Change of expiration date; limited use to primary particle size measurement; editorial changes); 
24 July 2015 (Change  of  expiration  date;  editorial  changes);  09 November 2012 (Extension  of  expiration  period;  editorial  changes); 
13 December 2007 (Original certificate date). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Users  of  this  RM  should  ensure  that  the  Report  of  Investigation  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished 
fax (301) 948-3730; 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at https://www.nist.gov/srm. 

telephone (301) 975-2200; 

SRM  Program: 

contacting 

the 

by 

RM 8011 

Page 8 of 8 

