ENT  OF 

hy. 

 
,
p
E

 
*

 
t
o

National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Report of Investigation 

 
46 
Reference Material 8446 
 
Perfluorinated Carboxylic Acids and Perfluorooctane Sulfonamide in Methanol 

and 

in 

 
This  Reference  Material (RM)  is  a  solution  of  perfluorinated  carboxylic  acids (PFCAs)  and  perfluorooctane 
sulfonamide (PFOSA) in methanol intended primarily for use in the calibration of chromatographic instrumentation.  
A unit of RM 8446 consists of four 2 mL ampoules, each containing approximately 1.2 mL of solution.  Two of the 
ampoules contain PFCAs in Methanol, and the other two ampoules contain PFCAs and PFOSA in Methanol. 
 
Reference Mass Fractions of PFCAs and PFOSA:  The reference mass fraction values are given in Table 1 for the 
PFCAs  in  Methanol  and  in  Table 2  for  the  PFCAs  and  PFOSA  in  Methanol.    The  values  are  based  on  results 
obtained  from  the  gravimetric  preparation  of  the  solution  and  analytical  results  determined  by  using  liquid 
chromatography.  Reference values are noncertified values that are the best estimates of the true values; however, the 
values do not meet the NIST criteria for certification and are provided with associated uncertainties that may reflect 
only measurement precision, may not include all sources of uncertainty, or may reflect a lack of sufficient statistical 
agreement among multiple analytical methods [1]. 
 
Expiration  of  Value  Assignments:    The  values  for  RM 8446  are  valid,  within  the  measurement  uncertainty 
specified, until 31 January 2024, provided the RM is handled and stored in accordance with the instructions given 
in this report (see “Instructions for Use”).  This report is nullified if the RM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise 
modified. 
 
Maintenance of RM:  NIST will monitor this RM over the period of its validity.  If substantive technical changes 
occur  that  affect  the  value  assignment  before  the  expiration  of  this  report,  NIST  will  notify  the  purchaser.  
Registration (see attached sheet) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination of the technical measurements leading to the value assignments of this RM was under the direction of  
J.L. Reiner and L.C. Sander of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Consultation  on  the  statistical  design  of  the  experimental  work  and  evaluation  of  the  data  were  provided  by 
N.A. Heckert and J.H. Yen of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Analytical  measurements  were  performed  by  J.M. Keller,  J.L. Reiner,  and  M.M. Schantz  of  the  NIST  Chemical 
Sciences Division. 
 
Office  of  Reference
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  RM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

s  validi 
ration  of  this  report 

cal  Sciences 

 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Report Issue Date:  18 March 2014 

  

RM 8446 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Page 1 of 3 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE 
 
yrted  to  have  toxic 
Handling:    This  material  contains  perfluorinated  compounds,  many  of  which  have  been  reported  to  have  toxic 
and/or carcinogenic properties, and should be handled with care.  Use proper disposal methods. 
 
Storage:  Sealed ampoules, as received, should be stored in the dark at temperatures below 30 °C. 
 
Opening of Ampoule:  Open ampoules carefully to prevent contamination or injury.  The ampoules are pre-scored 
and  should  NOT  be  opened  using  a  file.    Sample  aliquots,  minimum  sample  size  of  50 µL,  for  analysis  should  be 
withdrawn at 20 °C to 25 °C immediately after opening the ampoules and should be processed without delay for the 
reference values in Tables 1 and 2 to be valid within the stated uncertainties.  Because of the volatility of methanol, 
reference values are not applicable to material stored in ampoules that have been opened for more than 5 min, even if 
they are resealed. 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
Preparation:  The PFCAs and PFOSA used in the preparation of this RM were obtained from 3M (St. Paul, MN), 
ABCR (Karlsruhe, Germany), Fisher Chemical (Fairlawn, NJ) and Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO).  The solution was 
prepared  at  NIST  by  weighing  and  mixing  the  individual  perfluorinated  compounds  and  methanol.    The  weighed 
components  were  added  to  the  methanol  and  mixed  until  completely  dissolved  and  homogenized.    Four  molar 
equivalents of sodium hydroxide, based on the total mass of the perfluorinated compounds, were added following the 
addition of all compounds.  The total mass of this solution was measured, and the mass fractions were calculated for 
the  components.    This  bulk  solution  was  then  chilled  to  approximately  –5 °C,  and  1.2 mL  aliquots  were 
dispensed into 2 mL amber glass ampoules that were then flame sealed.  
 
Liquid  Chromatographic  Analysis:    Aliquots  from  ampoules  selected  by  a  stratified  random  sampling  were 
analyzed  by  using  liquid  chromatography  tandem  mass  spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).    An  internal  standard  solution 
containing  13C- labeled  PFCAs  and  PFOSA  was  added  to  each  sample  for  quantification  purposes.    Calibration 
solutions  consisting  of  weighed  amounts  of  the  perfluorinated  compounds  and  internal  standard  compounds  in 
methanol were chromatographically analyzed to determine analyte response factors. 
 
Reference  Mass  Fractions  for  PFCAs  in  Methanol:    Each reference value is a weighted mean of average mass 
fractions,  with  one  average 
from  chromatographic 
measurements [2,3].    The  expanded  uncertainty  is  the  half-width  of  a  symmetric  95 %  parametric  bootstrap 
confidence interval [4], which is consistent with the ISO/JCGM Guides [5,6].  The effective coverage factor, k, is 2.  
Since two methods were used for each compound, the measureand is the average mass fraction for each compound 
listed.  The reference values are metrologically traceable to the SI unit of milligram per kilogram. 
 

from  gravimetric  preparation  and 

RM  were  obtained  from

two  averages 

Table 1.  Reference Mass Fractions for PFCAs in Methanol in RM 8446 

 

PFCA 
 
 
PFHxA 
PFHpA 
PFOA 
PFNA 
PFDA 
PFUnA 
PFDoA 
PFTriA 
PFTA 

Compound 

Perfluorohexanoic acid 
Perfluoroheptanoic acid 
Perfluorooctanoate acid 
Perfluorononanoic acid 
Perfluorodecanoic acid 
Perfluoroundecanoic acid 
Perfluorododecanoic acid 
Perfluorotridecanoic acid 
Perfluorotetradecanoic acid 

Mass Fractions 
(mg/kg) 

59.1  ± 
76.0  ± 
54.8  ± 
63.0  ± 
58.1  ± 
62.8  ± 
59.5  ± 
62.9  ± 
58.0  ± 

1.4 
7.2 
2.2 
1.4 
4.0 
6.5 
7.0 
2.8 
3.8 

                                                           

(1) Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments,  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  report  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental  procedure.    Such  identification  does  not  imply  recommendation  or  endorsement  by  the  National  Institute  of 
Standards and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the 
purpose. 
RM 8446 

Page 2 of 3 

Reference  Mass  Fractions  for  PFCAs  and  PFOSA  in  Methanol:    Each  reference  value  is  a  weighted  mean  of 
average  mass  fractions,  with  one  average  from  gravimetric  preparation  and  two  averages  from  chromatographic 
measurements [2,3].    The  expanded  uncertainty  is  the  half-width  of  a  symmetric  95 %  parametric  bootstrap 
confidence interval [4], which is consistent with the ISO/JCGM Guides [5,6].  The effective coverage factor, k, is 2.  
Since two methods were used for each compound, the measureand is the average mass fraction for each compound 
listed.  The reference values are metrologically traceable to the SI unit of milligram per kilogram. 
 
 

8446 
Table 2.  Reference Mass Fractions for PFCAs and PFOSA in Methanol in RM 8446 

Mass  Fractions  for 

 

 
 
 
PFBA 
PFPeA 
 
  
PFOSA 

Compound 

Perfluorobutanoic acid 
Perfluoropentanoic acid 

Mass Fractions 
tions 
(mg/kg) 

±  11 

43 
60.9  ± 

0.9 

Perfluorooctane sulfonamide 

66.9  ± 

1.7 

 
 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  May, W.;  Parris, R.;  Beck II, C.;  Fassett, J.;  Greenberg, R.;  Guenther, F.;  Kramer, G.;  Wise, S.;  Gills, T.; 
Colbert, J.; Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.; Definition of Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of 
Reference  Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136  (2000);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/srm/upload/SP260-136.PDF (accessed March 2014). 

[2]  Dersimonian, R.; Laird, N.; Meta-analysis in clinical trials; Controlled Clin. Trials, Vol. 7, pp. 177–188 (1986). 
[3]  Rukhin, A.L.;  Weighted  Means  Statistics  in  Interlaboratory  Studies;  Metrologia,  Vol. 46(3),  pp. 323–331 

(2009). 

[4]  Efron, B.; Tibshirani, R.J.; An Introduction to the Bootstrap; Chapman & Hall (1993). 
[5]  JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data - Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement; 
(GUM 1995  with  Minor  Corrections),  Joint  Committee  for  Guides  in  Metrology (JCGM)  (2008);  available  at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  March 2014);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed March 2014). 

[6]  JCGM 101:2008;  Evaluation  of  Measurement  Data – Supplement 1  to  the  “Guide  to  the  Expression  of 
Uncertainty  in  Measurement”  -  Propagation  of  Distributions  using  a  Monte  Carlo  Method;  JCGM (2008); 
available at 
(accessed 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_101_2008_E.pdf 
March 2014). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This  can  be
Users  of  this  RM  should  ensure  that  the  Report  of  Investigation  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by 
(301) 948-3730; 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

‘port  of  Investigation  in  their  possession  is  current. 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301) 975-2200; 

ttp://www.niSt.2cC 

contacting 

telephone 

fax 

 

RM 8446 

Page 3 of 3 

