National  Institute  of  Standards  &  Technology 

Report  of  Investigation 

Reference  Material  8455 

Pyrite  Ore  Bioleaching  Substrate 

This  Reference  Materia!  (RM)  8455  was  produced  to  provide  a  sample  of  mineral  pyrite  for  use  as  a  bialeaching 
substrate  and  for  testing  biolcaching  rates.  This  RM  is  not  certified  but  provides  samples  so  investigators  in 
different  laborataries  can  be  assured  that  they  arc  investigaling  the  same  material.  The  material  consists  of 
100  #  of  New  Mexico  pyrite, 

The  averall  coordination  of  material  preparation  and  technical  measurements  was  performed  by  GJ.  Olson,  NIST 
Folymers  Division, 

The  supporting  aspects  concerning  the  issuance  of  this  Reference  Material  were  coordinated  through  the  Standard 
Reference  Materials  Program  by  J.  S.  Kane. 

Mincralopical  analysis  was  performed  by  the  Department  of  Mining,  Environmental  and  Geological  Engineering 
of  New  Mexico  Tech  an  polished  specimens  of  the  -10  mesh  material. 

X-ray  diffraction  was  performed  by  S.  Krueger,  NIST  Polymer  Division. 

A  detailed  account  of  preparation  and  characterization  of  the  material  is  given  in  reference  1. 

Mater 

ae 

The  pyrite  (20  kg,  -10  mesh)  was  obtained  from  the  Waldo  Mine,  New  Mexico  through  the  Department  of  Mining, 
Environmental  and  Geological  Engineering,  New  Mexico  Tech,  Socorro,  New  Mexico.  The  material  was  washed 
Uwice  in  4.6  M  HCl,  rinsed  extensively  with  deoxygenated  distilled  water  and  dried  under  nitrogen  al  60  °C.  The 
washed  material  was  ground  in  a  ceramic  ball  mill,  and  a  -165,  +250  mesh  fraction  was  obtained,  mixed,  and 
dispensed  (14K)  g  quantitics}  into  glass  bottles.  The  bottles  were  heated  in  a  vacuum  oven  at  128  °C  for  LS  hr. 
After  covling,  the  oven  was  brought  to  atmospheric  pressure  with  high  purity  nitrogen,  the  bottle  caps  were 
liphtened,  and  the  baltics  vacuum-sealed  in  foil  pouches. 

Procedures  for  Storage  and  Use 
Recommended 

Reference  Material  8454  should  be  kept  at  room  temperature  ia  its  original  bottle,  Ughtly  capped,  preferably  in 
@  vacuum  desiccator  under  an  inert  atmosphere,  If  the  material  is  to  be  used  for  microbiological  procedures, 
samples  should  be  remaved  aseptically. 

Gaithersbure,  MD  203899 
April  19,  1991 

Willian  P.  Reed,  Chie! 
Standard  Reference  Materials  Program 

{over}

  

The  as-received  material  was  95-96%  pyrite,  3.5-4.0%  specular  hematite  (occurring  as  blades  within  the  pyrite 
and  as  intergrowths  with  scant  magnetite)  and  <  0.5%  chalcopyrite  Coceurring  as  inclusions  within  pyrite  or  scant 
sphalerite).  Traces  of  magnetite,  sphalerite  and  galena  were  present.  Small  amounts  of  SiO?  (quartz)  were  also 
detected  by  x-ray  diffraction.  There  was  ao  evidence  of  the  presence  of  marcasite.  Chemical  analysis  of  single 
samples  from  three  different  bottles  showed  that  the  material  contained  47.0%  Fe  {standard  deviation  0.94%) 
and  49.6%  S$  (standard  deviation  2.13%). 

Composition 

Kiolvaching  Rate 

The  cate  of  biolcaching  of  Fe  from  the  pyrite  material  by  Thiobacillus  [errooxidans  {American  Type  Culture 
Collection  strain  13661,  reisolated  on  ferrous  iron  agar)  was  determined  by  a  number  of  cooperating  laboratories 
using  anew  ASTM  method  (ASTM  Committce  E-48,  Standard  Test  Method  for  Determining  the  Rate  of  Bioleach- 
ing  of  [ron  From  Pyrite  by  Thiobacillus  ferrooxidans)  Results  of  the  determinations  are  shown  in  Table  1.  Rates 
from  cach  laboratory  are  means  of  at  least  three  Masks,  and  were  not  corrected  for  Fe  removed  by  sampling. 

Table  1 

Rate  of  bioleaching  (mg  Fe  per  liter  per  hour) 

Laboratory 

%  18.0, 

] 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
s 

Rate 

&8 
78 
4 
10.90 
it3 
15.6 
13.2 
OL 

mean 
standard  dewiation 
%  relative  s.d. 

=  124 
40 
= 

32 

19 
14 
6 
4 
ll 

26 
4 

The  rate  of  abiotic  leaching  of  Fe  (sterile  controls)  was  determined  to  be  0.36  my  Feflhour  (mean  af  results  fram 
4  laboratories). 

Participating  scientists  and  laboratories  (not  necessarily  listed  in  order  above):  H.L.  Ehelich,  Renssclaer  Polytech- 
nic  Enstitute,  Troy,  NY,  P,  Greg  MeMillen,  Tonkin  Springs  Gold  Mining  Company,  Elko,  NV,  E.  Baglin,  U.S. 
Burcau  of  Mines,  Reno,  NV;  LA.  Brierley,  Newmont  Metallurgical  Services,  Inc.,  Salt  Lake  Ciry,  UT:  G.  Olson, 
NIST,  A.E.  Torma,  New  Mexico  Tech,  Socorro,  NM;  F,  Baldi,  University  af  Siena,  Italy;  Gi.  Rossi,  University  of 
Caghari,  Italy. 

Keforoness 

1.  GJ.  Olson,  “Development  of  Ore  Biolcaching  Standards,”  in  Proc.  Internal,  Symp.  Brohydzometallurgy,  Jackson, 
Wyoming,  August  1989,  pp.  71-79.  Editors:  J,  Salley,  R.G.L,  McCready,  P.L.  Wichlacz;  CANMET  SP39-  10,  Canada 
Centre  for  Mineral  and  Encrey  Technology,  Ottawa. 

2.  American  Society  for  Testing  and  Matecials,  "Standard  ‘Test  Method  for  Determining  the  Rate  of  Bioleaching 
of  tron  From  Pyrite  by  Thiobacillus  ferrooxidans,”  Designation  E  1357-90,  in  Annual  Book  of  ASTM  Standards, 
ASTM,  Philadelphia,  PA  1990,

