ay 

National  Institute  of  Standards  &  Technology 

Report  of  Investigation 

Reference  Material  8466 

in 

use 

is  intended  for 

A  unit  of  RM  8466  consists  of  one  vial  containing  approximately  100  mg  of  lindane. 

*-Hexachlorocyclohexane  (Lindane) 
‘This  Reference  Material  (RM)  is  provided  as  a  primary  reference  compound  of  measured  purity  for 
It 
hexachlorocyclohexane  (lindane). 
the 
the  evaluation  of  procedures  used  in 
measurement  of  lindane  in  environmental  samples  and  for  the  preparation  and  evaluation  of  daily  working 
‘This  material  can  also  be  used  in  any  case  when  lindane  of  known  purity 
standards  used  in  these  procedures, 
Js  required. 
IDENTIFICATION  AND  PURITY  INVESTIGATION 
“The  purity  of  lindane  and  the  estimated  uncertainty  are  given  in  Table  1. 
analyses  by  gas  chromatography 
for 
determination. 
confirmation. 
value  presented  in  Table  1 

The  purity  listed  is  based  on 
(GC),  differential  scanning  calorimetry  (DSC)  and  the  Karl  Fischer  method 
and  melting  point 
analysis 
GC  retention  times  on  two  capillary  columns  with  different  polarity  were  used  as  further 
is  important  to  note  that  this  is  not a  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  and  the  purity 
It 

Identification  is  based  on  mass  spectral 

the  determination  of  water. 

is  not  certified. 
‘Table  1, 

Percent  Purity  of  Lindane* 

Chemical  Abstracts  Service  (CAS)  Nomenclature 

CAS  Registry  Number 

Purity  (weight  percent) 

S,6-hexachlorocyelohexane 

(lex  2,38  te S0468)-1,2 
*  This  compound  is  also  commonly  known  as  y-hexachlorocyclohexane  (y-HCH)  or  y-benzenexexachloride 
(BHO). 
‘The  purity  and  the  estimated  uncertainty  interval  are  based  on  scientific  judgment  and  evaluation  of  the 
analytical  procedures  applied  on 
the  systematic 
Uilferences  beoween  the  two  methods  (GC  and 

this  material  including  the  analytical  imprecision  and 

999  +01 

89.9 

3 

DSC), 

This  compound  has  been  reported  to  have  toxie,  mutagenic  and/or  carcinogenic  properties  when 
Handle  with  care,  use  proper  protective  gear,  use  proper  disposal 

NOTICE  AND  WARNING  TO  USERS 
Mandling: 
ingested,  inhaled  or  absorbed  into  the  skin, 
methods  and  wash  hands  after  handling. 
Storage: 
or  freezer. 
Preparation  and  analytical  determinations  were  performed  in  the  NIST  Organic  Analytical  Research  Division 
by  R. 
‘The  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  for  determination  of  the  purity  was  under  the  direction  of 
R.E.  Rebbert,  R.M. 

Vials,  as  received,  should  be  kept  tightly  sealed,  protected  from  the  light,  and  stored  in  a  refrigerator 

Parris  and  S.A.  Wise  of  the  NIST  Organic  Analytical  Research  Division, 

E,  Rebbert,  NE,  Gallauresi, S.A. Margolis  and  RM.  Parris. 

Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 
April  13,  1992, 

Reed,  Chief 
Standard  Reference  Materials  Program 

William  P. 

(over)

  

  

  

  

a 

Gills 

5  %  phenyl-substituted  methylpolysiloxane  (DB-S)  and  a 

The  bulk  material  was  dispensed  into 4  mL  amber  glass  vials. 

design  of  the  experimental  work  and  on  evaluation  of  the  data  was  provided 

Consultation  on  the  statistical 
by  S.B.  Schiller,  Statistical  Engineering  Division, 
The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation  and  issuance  of  this  Reference  Material  were 
coordinated  through  the  Standard  Reference  Materials  Program  by  T-E. 
PREPARATION  AND  ANALYSIS. 
Lindane,  used  in  the  preparation  of  this  RM,  was  obtained  from  Crescent  Chemical  Company,  Hauppauge, 
New  York. 
Ten  vials  were  then  chosen  for 
‘Two  samples  of  about  1  mg  each  were  taken  from  each 
analysis  using  a  modified  stratified  random  selection. 
vial  for  the  DSC  measurements  of  purity  and  two  additional  samples  of about  3  mg  each  were  taken  from  each 
‘These  latter  samples  were 
vial  for  the  GC  measurements  of  purity  using  a  flame  ionization  detector  (FID). 
GC  analyses  were  performed  on 
3  gL  were  injected  for  the 
dissolved  in  hexane  and  then  2  to 
two  columns  with  different  polarity,  ic., 
14  % 
of  the  measurements 
cyanopropyl  phenyl-substituted  methylpolysiloxane  (DB-1701). 
for  each  method  is  given  in  Table  2. 
In  the  GC  method  with  FID,  the  assumption  is  made 
Both  of  these  methods  (GC  and  DSC)  have  limitations, 
Errors  can 
that  the  parent  compound  and  the  impurities  have  equal  area  response  factors  on  a  weight  basis. 
result  from  1)  the  retention  of  some  impurities  on  the  column  or  2)  insufficient  resolution  between  the 
‘Two  GC 
Both  of these  effects  would  tend  to  give  purity  resukss  that  are  too  high. 
impurities  and  lindane. 
A  third  source  of  error  is 
colurans  with  different  polarities  were  used  to  try 
This  effect  would  tend  to  give  purity 
the  partial  decomposition  of  the  parent  compound  during  analysis. 
results  that  are  {00  low. 
The 
‘This  would  result 
of  mixed  crystals. 
DSC  method  can  also  introduce  systematic  errors  caused  by  the  formation 
‘The  DSC  method  produces  purity  results  on  a  molar 
in  a  purity  value  that  is  higher  than  the  actual  value. 
However,  the  result  is  equal  to  2  weight  basis  if  the  impurities  have  the  same  molecular  weight  as  the 
basis. 
main  constituent. 
Water  analysis  was  performed  on  three  samples  of about  100  mg  each  using  the  Karl  Fischer  method. 
Within 
the  experimental  error  (0.05  weight  %),  no  water  was  found  in  this  RM  and  therefore,  no  correction  was  made 
for  moisture  content, 
SUMMARY 

to  minimize  these  two  effects. 
There  is  no  evidence  that  lindane  decomposes  under  the  GC  conditions  used. 

GC  analyses. 
A  summary  of  the  results 

‘The  value  of  purity  presented  in 
chromatography,  differential  scanning  calorimetry and  Karl  Fischer 
water  analysis. 
"best  estimate”  value  since, 
‘The  purity  is 
of  the  three 
approximations  mentioned  above,  no  analyses  were  made  for  inorganic  or  insoluble  substances. 

is  based  on  measurements  using  gas 
It  is  the  mean  of the  results 
the 
in  addition  to 

this  report,  as  listed  in  Table  1, 

(3)  employed  methods. 

a 

Analytical  Method 

Parity 

Table  2.  Summary  of  Analytical  Results 

psc 
Gc  (DBS) 
GC  (DB-1701) 
Each  uncertainty  interval  listed  is  the  standard  deviation  ofa  single  measurement  based  on  20  measurements 
for  each  method. 

99.98  =  0.01  (mole  percent) 
0.01  (weight  percent) 
99.89  =  0.01  (weight  percent) 

  
  

 

  

 

