National  Institute  of  Standards  &  Technology 

Report  of  Investigation 

Reference  Material  8467 

4,4-DDE 

‘This  Reference  Material  (RM)  is  provided  as a  primary  reference  compound  of  measured  purity  for  4,4"-DDE. 
4,4"-DDE  in  environmental 
Its  intended  for  use  in  the  evaluation  of  procedures  used  in  the  measurement  of 
samples  and  for  the  preparation  and  evaluation  of  daily  working  standards  used  in  these  procedures. 
This, 
A  unit  of  RM  8467  consists 
material  ean  also  be  used  in  any  case  when  4,4"-DDE  of known  purity  is  required. 
of  one  vial  containing  approximately  100  mg  of  4,4”-DDE, 
IDENTIFICATION  AND  PURITY  INVESTIGATION 
‘The  purity  of  4,4-DDE  and  the  estimated  uncertainty  are  given  in  Table  1. 
‘The  purity  listed  is  based  on 
analyses  by  gas  chromatography  (GC),  differential  scanning  calorimetry  (DSC)  and  the  Kar]  Fischer  method 
for 
point 
determination. 
GC  retention  times  on  two  capillary  columns  with  different  polarity  were  used  as  further 
is  important  to  note  that  this  Is  not  a  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  and  the  purity 
It 
confirmation. 
value  presented  below  in  Table  1 

the  determination  of  water. 

on  mass  spectral  analysis 

Mentification  is  based 

melting 

and 

is  not  certified 
Table  1. 

Percent  Purity  of  4¢-DDE 

Chemical  Abstracts  Service  (CAS)  Nomenclature 
1,1*(dichloroethenylidene)bis[4-chlorobenzene} 
“The  purity  and  the  estimated  uncertainty  interval  ate  based  on  scientific  judgment  and  evaluation  of  the 
the  systematic 
analytical  procedures  applied  on 
Uifferences  between  the  two  methods  (GC  and  DSC). 
NOTICE  AND  WARNING  TO  USERS 

CAS  Registry  Number 
7.55.9 

this  material  including  the  analytical  imprecision  and 

Parity  (weight  percent) 

99.8  #02 

Handling:  ‘This  compound  has  been  reported  to  have  toxic,  mutagenic  andjor  carcinogenic  properties  when 
Handle  with  care,  use  proper  protective  gear,  use  proper  disposal 
ingested,  inhaled  or  absorbed  into  the  skin. 
methods  and  wash  hands  after  handling, 

  

Vials,  as  received,  should  be  kept  tightly  sealed,  protected  from  the  light,  and  stored  in  a  refrigerator 

Storage: 
oor  freezer. 
Preparation  and  analytical  determinations  were  performed  in  the  NIST  Organic  Analytical  Research  Division, 
by 

E.  Rebbert, N.E.  Gallauresi, S.A.  Margolis  and  RM.  Parris, 

R. 

RM. 

‘The  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  for  determination  of  the  purity  was  under  the  dircetion  of 
RE.  Rebbert, 
Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 
April  13,  1992, 

Parris  and  S.A.  Wise  of  the  NIST  Organic  Analytical  Research  Division, 

William  P,  Reed,  Chit 
Standard  Reference  Materials  Program 

(over)

  

  

  

  
  

Consultation  on  the  statistical  design  of  the  experimental  work  and  on  evaluation  of  the  data  was  provided 
by  SB.  Schiller,  Statistical  Engineering  Division. 

‘The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation  and  issuance  of  this  Reference  Material  were 
coordinated  through  the  Standard  Reference  Materials  Program  by  T.E.  Gill 
PREPARATION  AND  ANALYSIS 
4,8-DDE,  used  in  the  preparation  of  this  RM,  was  obtained  from  Crescent  Chemical  Company,  Hauppauge, 
Ten  vials  were  then  chosen  for 
New  York. 
analysis  using  a  modified  stratified  random  selection. 
‘Two  samples  of  about  1  mg  each  were  taken  from  each 
vial  for  the  DSC  measurements  of  purity  and  two  additional  samples  of  about  3  mg  each  were  taken  from  each 
‘These  latter  samples  were 
vial  for  the  GC  measurements  of  purity  using  a  flame  ionization  detector  (FID). 
yL.  were  injected  for  the  GC  analysis,  GC  analyses  were  performed  on 
dissolved  in  hexane  and  then  1  to  3 
5  %  phenyl-substituted  methylpolysiloxane  (DB-S)  and  a 
14  % 
ie,, 
‘ovo  columns  with  different  polarity, 
cyanopropyl  phenylsubstituted  methylpolysiloxane  (DB-1701).  A  summary of 
the  results  of the  measurements 
for  each  method  is  given  in  Table  2, 

‘The  bulk  material  was  dispensed  into  4  mL  amber  glass  vials. 

a 

In  the  GC  method  with  FID,  the  assumption  is  made 
Both  of  these  methods  (GC  and  DSC)  have  limitations. 
Errors  can  result 
that  the  parent  compound  and  the  impurities  have  equal  response  factors  on  a  weight  basis. 
from  1)  the  retention  of  some  impurities  on  the  column  or  2)  insufficient  resolution  between  the  impurities 
and  4,-DDE. 
Two  GC  columns 
Both  of  these  effects  would  tend  to  give  purity  results  that  are  too  high. 
with  different  polarities  were  used  to  ty  to  minimize  these  two  effects. 
A  third  source  of  error  is  the  partial 
This  effect  would  tend  to  give  purity  results  that  are 
‘decomposition  of  the  parent  compound  during  analysis. 
GC  conditions  used.  ‘The  DSC  method 
There  is  no  evidence  that  44-DDE  decomposes  under  the 
too  low, 
can  also  introduce 
This  would  result  in @  purity 
value  that  is  higher  than  the  actual  value. 
‘The  DSC  method  produces  purity  results  on  a  molar  basis, 
However,  the  result  is  equal  to  a  weight  basis  if  the  impurities  have  the  same  molecular  weight  as  the  main 
constituent. 

systematic  errors  caused  by  the  formation  of  mixed  crystals. 

  

Water  analysis  was  performed  on  three  samples  of  about  100  mg  each  using  the  Karl  Fischer  method, 
Within 
the  experimental  error  (0.05  weight  %),  no  water was  found  in  this  RM  and  therefore,  no  correction  was  made 
for  moisture  content. 

SUMMARY 

‘The  value  of  purity  presented  in 
water  analysis. 
chromatography,  differential  scanning  calorimetry  and  Karl  Fischer 
of 
The  purity 
approximations  mentioned  above,  no  analyses  were  made  for  inorganic  or  insoluble  substances, 

is  based  on  measurements  using  gas 
Its  the  mean of  the  results 
the 

“best  estimate’  value  since,  in  addition  to 

the  three  (3)  employed  methods, 

this  report,  as  listed  in  Table  1, 

is 

a 

Analytical  Method 

Parity 

‘Table 2. Summary  of  Analytical  Results 

Dsc 
GC  (DB-5) 
GC  (DB-1701) 
Each  uncertainty  interval  listed  is  the  standard  deviation  of a  single  measurement  based.on  20  measurements 
for  each  method. 

99.7 
=  02  (mole  percent) 
99.87  =  0.03  (weight  percent) 
99.89  =  0.03  (weight  percent) 

  

 

 

