National  Institute  of  Standards  &  Technology 

Report  of  Investigation 

Reference  Material  8469 

4,4-DDT 

‘This  Reference  Material  (RM)  is  provided  as  a  primary  reference  compound  of  measured  purity  for  4,4-DDT. 
It  is  intended  for  use  in  the  evaluation  of  procedures  used  in  the  measurement  of  4,4-DDT 
in  environmental 
samples  and  for  the  preparation  and  evaluation  of  daily  working  standards  used  in  these  procedures. 
‘This 
material  can  also  be  used  in  any  case  when  4,4-DDT  of  known  purity  is  required.  A  unit  of  RM  8469  consists, 
of  one  vial  containing  approximately  100  mg  of  4,4”-DDT, 
1D 

‘TIFICATION  AND  PURITY  INVESTIGATION 

  

the  determination  of  water. 

‘The  purity  of  44-DDT  and  the  estimated  uncertainty  are  given  in  Table  1, 
The  purity  listed  is  based  on 
analyses  by  gas  chromatography  (GO),  differential  scanning  calorimetry  (DSC)  and  the  Karl  Fischer  method 
is  based  on  mass  spectral  analysis  and  melting  point 
for 
determination. 
GC  retention  times  on  two  capillary  columns  with  different  polarity  were  used  as  further 
is  important  to  note  that  this  is  not  a  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  and  the  purity 
It 
confirmation. 
value  presented  in 

is  not  certified. 

Identification 

Table  1 

‘Table  1. 

Percent  Purity   

1  44-DDT 

Chemical  Abstracts  Services  (CAS)  Nomenclature 
Arichloroethylidene)bis{4-chlorobenzene] 

CAS  Registry  Number 
50.29-3 

Purity  (weight  percent) 
998  &  0.4 

‘The  purity  and  the  estimated  uncertainty  interval  are  based  on  scientific  judgment  and  evaluation  of  the 
this  material  including  the  analytical  imprecision  and  the  systematic 
analytical  procedures  applied  on 
differences  between  the  two  methods  (GC  and  DSC). 
NOTICE  AND  WARNING  TO  USERS 

Handling:  This  compound  has  been  reported  to  have  toxic,  mutagenic  andjor  carcinogenic  properties  when 
Handle  with  care,  use  proper  protective  gear,  use  proper  disposal 
ingested,  inhaled  or  absored  into  the  skin, 
methods  and  wash  hands  after  handling. 

Storage:  Vials,  as  received,  should  be  kept  tightly  sealed,  protected  fom  the  light,  and  stored  in  a  refrigerator 
or  freezer. 

Preparation  and  analytical  determinations  were  performed  in  the  NIST  Organic  Analytical  Research  Division 
by  R.E,  Rebbert,  N.E.  Gallauresi,  S.A.  Margolis  and  RM.  Parts, 
‘The  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  for  determination  of  the  purity  was  under  the  direction  of 
R.E,  Rebbert, 
Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 
April  13,  1992 

Parris  and  S.A.  Wise  of  the  NIST  Organic  Analytical  Research  Division, 

William P. Reed,Chier 
Materials  Program 
‘Standard  Reference 

RM. 

(over)

  

  
  

  

  

  

Consultation  on  the  statistical  design  of  the  experimental  work  and  on  evaluation  of  the  data  was  provided 
by  S.B,  Schiller,  Statistical  Engineering  Division. 
‘The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation  and  issuance  of  this  Reference  Material  were 
coordinated  through  the  Standard  Reference  Materials  Program  by  T.E.  Gills. 
PREPARATION  AND  ANALYSIS 

in  Table  2. 

a  5  %  phenyl-substituted  methylpolysiloxane  (DB-S)  and  a 

  44'-DDT,  used  in  the  preparation  of  this  RM,  was  obtained  from  Crescent  Chemical  Company,  Hauppauge, 
New  York. 
‘The  bulk  material  was  dispensed  into  4  mL,  amber  glass  vials.  Ten  vials  were  then  chosen  for 
analysis  using  a  modified  stratified  random  selection.  ‘Two  samples  of  about  1  mg  each  were  taken  {rom  each 
vial  for  the  DSC  measurements  of  purity  and  two  additional  samples  of  about  3  mg  each  were  taken  from  each 
vial  for  the  GC  measurements  of  purity  using  a  flame  ionization  detector  (FID). 
These  latter  samples  were 
injected  for  the  GC  analyses.  GC  analyses  were  performed  on 
dissolved  in  hexane  and  then  2  t0  3  aL  were 
14  % 
‘wo  columns  with  different  polarity,  Le., 
cyanopropyl  phenyl-substituted  methylpolysiloxane  (DB-1701).  A  summary  of the  results  of  the  measurements 
for  each  method  is  given 
Both  of  these  methods  (GC  and  DSC)  have limitations.  In  the  GC  method  with  FID,  assumption  is  made  that 
‘he  parent  compound and  the  impurities  have  equal  area  response 
factors  on  a  weight  basis,  Errors  can  result 
from  1)  the  retention  of  some  impurities  on  the  column  or  2)  insufficient  resolution  between  the  impurities 
and  4#-DDT. 
Two  GC  cohernns 
‘with  different  polarity  were  used  to  try 
A  third  source  of  error  is  the  partial 
to  minimize  these  two  effects. 
This  effect  would  tend  to  give  purity  results  that  are 
‘decomposition  of  the  parent  compound  during  analysis. 
too  low.  There  is  evidence  in  the  literature  that 4,4"-DDT  decomposes  under  the  GC  conditions  used,  but  this 
cffect  is  minimat  since  the  purity  values  determined  by  GC  are  already  slightly  greater  than  that  determined 
Moreover,  the  product  of  the  thermal  decomposition  is  4,4"-DDE  and  this  is  found  at  a  maximum 
by  DSC. 
The  DSC  method  can  also  introduce  systematic  errors  caused  by  the  formation  of 
of  0.04  9%  as  an  impurity. 
‘The  DSC  method 
mixed  crystals. 
However,  the  result  is  approximately  equal  to  a  weight  basis  if  the 
produces  purity  results  on  a  motar  basis. 
impurities  have  the  same  molecular  weight  as  the  main  constituent 

Both  of  these  effects  would  tend  to  give  purity  results  that  are  too  high, 

a  purity  value  that  is  higher  than  the  actual  value. 

‘This  would  result  in 

Water  analysis  was  pesformed  on  three  samples  of  about  100  mg  cach  using  the  Karl  Fischer  method.  Within 
the  experimental  error  (0.05  weight  %),  no  water  was  found  in  this  RM  and  therefore,  no  correction  was  made 
for  moisture  content. 

SUMMARY 
‘The  value  of  purity  presented  in  this  report,  as 
is  based  on  measurements  using  gas 
the  results 
is  the  mean  of 
chromatography,  differential  scanning  calorimetry  and  Karl  Fischer  water  analysis, 
the 
The  purity 
(3)  employed  methods. 
of 
approximations  mentioned  above,  no  analyses  were  made  for  inorganic  or  insoluble  substances 

a  "best  estimate”  value  since 

listed  in 
is 

in  addition  to 

Table  1, 

three 

the 

It 

  

Analytical  Method 

Purity 

Table  2.  Summary  of  Analytical  Results 

psc 
GC 
(DB-5) 
GC  (DB-1701) 
Each  uncertainty  interval  listed  is  the  standard  deviation  of  a  single  measurement  based  on  20  measurements 
for  each  method. 

99.73  +  0.03  (mole  percent) 
99.84  *  0.01  (weight  percent) 
9981  %  0,02  (weight  percent) 

  

  

  

 

 

