nN 
LS 

argy of 

f  i  °  National  Institute  of  Standards  &  Cechnology 
3 

Report  of  Inhestigation 

Reference  Material  8510 

Moisture  in  Methanol 

Reference  Material  (RM)  8510  is  rtended  proman}y  for  use  mthe  calbraton  of  instrmvents  and  the  evalaton  of  methods  used  for 

&  RM  2510  corsists  offive  arnpouks,  each  contaning  approamatehy S  mL  of  ethanol  solthon  with 

moisture  detarmmation  A  wot 
a  trace  concertration  level  of  water. 

Analyiical  Resuliz 

The  reference  value  is  based  on  the  results  of  an  interlaboratory  comparison  exercise  conducted  among  13  laboratones  and  NIST 
using  the  coulctnetuc  Earl  Fischer  method.  In  additon,  NIST  measzements  using  the  yvolumetuc  Earl  Fischer  method  were 
It  is 
performed  to  provide  an  independent  assessment  of  both the  moisture  contert  as  well  as  the  homogenety  of  the  RM  Iot. 

important  to  note  that  this  materials  nota  Standard  Reference  Material”  and  the  reference  value  is  method  dependent. 

Reference  Concentrabon  of  Vale  Mouture:  325  mgfke  +  14  me/ke” 

in  each  auponk 
“The  reference  value  duc  ctainty  describe  am 
of RAI8510.  The  wcettentty  incbodes  the  wicerteitty due  to  the  Inbetldbombory  comprise  escmcice  mews  as  arell ac  atom  obseed  withn 
the  axpoul:  All  sequence. 

terval  whichis  @t  leet a  95  %  contidence  interval 

for  the  moistum  corcetration 

Expiration  of  Reference  Value:  The  reference  value  of  RM  8510  is  vahd,  within  the  measirement  uncertamby  specified,  until 
December 31,  2027,  provided  the  RM  is  handled in  accordance  with  uetructors  gen  ths  Report  of  Investigation  (see  Instractions 

for  Use).  This  reference  value  is  nullified  tthe  RM  i  damaged  contammated,  or  modiied. 

The  coordination  of  the  teclntcal  measurements  was  under  the  direction  of  5.4.  Margolis  and  $.4.  Wise  of  the  NIST  Analytical 
Chemistry  Division. 

Preparation  and  analytical  maasiements  wer  performed by  5.4.  Margolis,  J.C  Wilhars,  and  L.C.  Sander  of  the  NIST  Analytical 
Chemistuy  Division 

Consultation  on  the  statistical  design  of  the  expermettal work  and  evaluation  of  the  data  were  provided  by  5.B.  Schiller  ad  L.M. 
Gill  of  the  NIST  Statistical  Engreenmg  Division. 

The  support  aspects  nrobred  im  the  preparahon,  anahras,  and  issuance  ofthis  RM  were  coordimated  through  the  Standard  Reference 
Materials  Program by  B.S.  MacDonald. 

Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 
Certificate  Issue  Date:  June  12,  1997 
8/21.05  (original  certificate  dete) 
*Thie  Teyision  TepOrts  a  expinetion dete  aud  editorichy  charged  ‘rec  ommended"  to  ‘Teer e"  value.

Thomas  E.  Gulls,  Chief 
Standard  Reference  Materials  Progran 

INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  USE 

Handing:  The  ampoules  are  sealed  under  dry  argon.  This  matenal s  hyeroscopic;  therefore,  after  openmethe  ampoules,  extreme 
caution  should  be  exercised  to  avoid  comtsnmation with  moisture  (e.¢.,  dey  messing  devices  and  contamers  wnt  be  wed). 

Storage  and  Use:  Ampodes  should be  stored  at  roomtemperatire.  For  the  reference  value  to  be  valid  yithm  the  stated  wncertant;, 
samples  of  the  material  for  analysis  should be  withdrawn  from  the  ampoules  immmrediateby  after  opering,  transferred  into  oven-dried 
meaning  devices  and  wed  without  delay.  The  reference  value  i  not  applicable  to  ampoules  that  have  been  stored  after  opemmeg, 
event  the  anpoules  are  resealed. 

PREPAR  ATION  AND  ANALYSIS 

Preparation  of  RM  £510:  Methanol,  as  supplied  from  the  manufacturer,  typically  comtans  trace  levels  of  water.  The  normnal 

moishue  level  was  deternmed  m  several  lots  of  HPLC-grade  methanol  and  the  appropriate  Iot  was  selected  for  ampoulmg.  Therefore, 
the  reference  moisture  vabe  reflects  the  content  after  processing  4  NIST  and  not  necessarily the  masture  cortert  when  obtained  from 
the  manufacturer.  Apprarmately  16  L  (fowr  bottles)  ofthe  selected  lot  were  powed  into  a  18.9  L  (5-gal)  bottk  contamme,  dry  argon, 
and  the  solution  stixred  for  30  nin.  The  argon  headspace  above  the  liquid  was  mamtamed  vath  argon  form  an  attached  Teflon”  bag 
contamme  dry  argon.  As  the  levd  of  the  sobrhon  decreased  im  the  bottle  over  the  course  of  the  ampoulmg,  argon  replaced  the  thud. 

In  this  way a  sealed  system  was  manutamed  to  nmomme  moisture  cortammaton  from  the  ar. 
artomahesly nto  aygon-filed,  died  ampoules  and  then  sealed. 

Aliquots  of 5  mL  were  dispensed 

Analytical  Wlethods:  An  rtetlaboratory  companson  exercise  anong  15  laboratones  and  NIST  was  conducted  to  determme  the 
moishue  contet  of  FM  8510 
All  analyses  in  the  mteraboratory  comparison  exerche  were  performed  usmg  coubbmetuc  Earl  Fischer 
niostruamentation  and  reagents  routnely  wed  nthe  participatng  laboratomes.  Each  cooperating  laboratony  anabrzed  a  single  sample 
fice  each  of  bao  anpoules  of  RM  8510.  The  participating  laboratories  are  isted  below. 

Homozenenty  Study:  Samples  from  40  ampoules,  selected  throughan  the  Hll  sequence,  were  measured at  NIST  in  a  random  order 
over  four  daysusing  the  yvolmnetic  Earl  Fischer  method  A  statsticalhy  significart  merease  m1  moisture  cortert  with  fill sequence  was 
detected in  the  homogeneity  study.  A  13  mgvke  change  mm  concentration was  predicted  by  the  homogenemty  study  over  the  entre 

population  of  anpoules  of  RM  8510  and  was  included  in  the  total  ucertarty  of  the  reference  yabe.  The  results  from  the  vohmetic 
Karl  Fsher  rethod  were  also  wed  as  an  independent  method  to  confirm  the  round  robin  resuks  obtamed by  the  use  of  the  couloretzic 
Karl  Fisher  method. 

Parteipats  mthe  RM  8510  Interlaboratory  Comparison  Exerase: 

J,  Angelo,  Exxon  Research  &  Enemeerme  Co.,  Baytown,  TX 
R.,  Cherrilo,  Shell  Development  Co.,  Houston,  TX 

J,  Greer,  United  Power  Services  Inc,  Nashville,  TH 
C.,  Smith,  Cosa  Instrument  Co.,  Norwood,  NJ 
L,,  Shuck,  Photovolt,  Indianapols,  IN 
G.,  Gauger,  Me  Graw-Ediason  Power  System,  Franksvile,  WI 
P.,  Grifin,  Doble  Engmeermg  Co.,  Watertown,  MA 

R.,  Deenng,  Bonneville  Power  Admaoustrahon,  Yancourer,  Wa 
D.,  Meyes,,  $0.  Meyers  Ine,  Talmadge,  OH 
G.  Thomas,  Big  River  Hlectuce  Corp.,  Henderson,  EY 

4.,  Eaupa,  Baltimore  Gas  &  Electuc,  Baltimore,  MD 
¥.,  Peterson,  Mirmesota  Power  Co.,  Duluth,  MN 
L.,  Graziano,  COC  Scientitic,  Fairfax,  ¥A 

‘Cartan  cammercialmeteriak  avd  equipment ate  identified  inorder to  adequately  pecify  the  experimental  promdare.  Such  identification 
or  dorsement  by  the  Mationel  Fistibate  of  Standards  and  Technology, nor  does  it  meply  that  the  materials  of 

does  not  maphy  erecommendation 
SQUIPIHANE 

ae  recess  ily  the  best  ailable  for  this  purpose.

