et  OF  Coy 

wif 
 
l
e
 C

e

 
,
e
e
P

 
*

 
n
y

Stares  oF ° 

National  Institute  of  Standards  &  Cechnology 

(In  Cooperation  with  the  American  Society  for  Testing  and  Materials) 

This  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  a  sintered  tungsten  carbide  base  material  in  the  form  of  a  fine  powder 
(150  ym)  intended  for  use  in  checking  chemical  and  instrumental  methods  of  analysis.  SRM  888  was  developed 
under  the  cooperative  program  for  certification  with  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  (NIST) 
and  the  American  Society  for  Testing  and  Materials  (ASTM). 

Certificate  of  Analysis 

Standard  Reference  Material  888 

Cemented  Carbide 

(W-64,  Co-25,  Ta-5) 

Certified 
Value* 

Estimated 
Uncertainty” 

Percent  by  Weight 

Cobalt 

24.7 

Tantalum 

4.77 

0.2 

08 

4  The  certified  value  is  the  present  best  estimate  of  the  "true"  value  based  on  the  NIST-ASTM  cooperative  program  for  certification. 

>  The  estimated  uncertainty  is  based  on  judgment  and  represents  an  evaluation  of  the  combined  effects  of  method  imprecision,  possible  sys- 
tematic  errors  among  methods,  and  material  variability.  No  attempt  was  made  to  derive  exact  statistical  measures  of  imprecision  because  several 
methods  were  involved  in  the  determination  of  the  certified  constituent. 

verall  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading 

sur 

0 

nogto 

to  certification  was  performed  under  the  direction 

1c 

of  J.I. 

Shultz,  Research  Associate,  ASTM-NIST  Research  Associa  e  Program. 

 
t
e

The  technical  and  support  aspects  involved  in  the  preparation,  certification,  and  issuance  of  this  Standard  Reference 
Material  were  coordinated  through  the  Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials  by  W.P.  Reed. 

PLANNING,  PREPARATION,  TESTING,  AND  ANALYSIS: 

The  material  for  this  SRM  was  provided  by  GTE  Products  Corp.,  Towanda,  Pennsylvania  through  the  courtesy  of 
R.  Dyck. 

The  preparation  of  the  material  was  under  the  direction  of  M.E.  Shaffer  of  the  Hard  Materials  Section,  GTE 
Products  Corp.,  Towanda,  Pennsylvania. 

Homogeneity  testing  was  performed  at  GTE  Products  Corp.  by  J.S.  Mras  and  at  NIST  by  G.A.  Sleater. 

Cooperative  analyses  for  certification  were  performed  in  the  following  laboratories: 

-  GTE  Products  Corp.,  Towanda,  Pennsylvania,  J.  Mras,  J.R.  Barton,  L.J.  Kring  and  M.  Fedorchak. 
-  Ledoux  &  Company,  Teaneck,  N.J.,  S.  Kallmann  and  C.L.  Maul. 

September  5,  1988 
Gaithersburg,  MD  20899 

Stanley  D.  Rasbery,  Chief 
Office  of  Standard  Reference  Materials 

(over)

-  Metallurgical  Industries,  Inc.,  Tinton  Falls,  N.J.,  R.  Liu. 
-  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology,  Gas  and  Particulate  Science  Division,  Gaithersburg,  MD, 
Z.  Wang  and  P.A.  Pella. 
-  Timken  Company,  Canton,  Ohio,  N.J.  Stecyk. 
-  Valeron  Corporation,  Troy,  Michigan,  R.  Fike. 

Elements  other  than  those  certified  may  be  present  in  this  material  as  indicated  below.  These  are  not  certified,  but 
are  given  as  additional  information  on  the  composition. 

Element 

Molybdenum 
Nickel 
Iron 
Titanium 
Niobium 
Carbon 

%  by  Weight 
Concentration, 

(<.05) 
(<.05) 
(<.05) 
(.04) 
(<.05) 
(4.6  )

