National Institute of Standards & Technology 

 

Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material 911c 

 

 
Cholesterol 

99.2 %  ±  0.4 % 

Certified Cholesterol Mass Faction: 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is certified as a chemical of known purity.  It is intended primarily for use 
in the calibration and standardization of procedures for the determination of cholesterol in research samples and for 
routine  evaluations  of  daily  working  standards  used  in  these  procedures.    A  unit  of  SRM 911c  consists  of  2 g  of 
material. 
 
Certified Value:  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has the highest confidence in its accuracy in that 
all known or suspected sources of bias have been investigated or taken into account [1].  This certified value is the 
equally  weighted  mean  of  results  obtained  from  the  analytical  methods.    The  expanded  uncertainty  in  the  certified 
concentration  is  calculated  as  U = kuc.    The  quantity  uc is  the  combined  standard  uncertainty  calculated  based  on  a 
Bayesian approach in reference 1 and the ISO/JCGM Guide [2].  The coverage factor, k = 2, represents an approximate 
95 % level of confidence.  The measurand is the total mass fraction of cholesterol.  Metrological traceability to the SI 
derived unit for mass fraction (expressed as percent). 
 
 
 
Reference Value:  The major impurity in this material is 5,24-cholestadiene-3β-ol, identified by nuclear magnetic 
resonance (NMR) analysis.  The reference concentration value of this impurity is based upon measurements by liquid 
chromatography  mass  spectrometry (LC/MS)  and  liquid  chromatography  with  ultra  violet  detection (LC/UV).    A 
reference value is a noncertified value that is the best estimate of the true values; however, the value does not meet 
NIST  criteria  for  certification  and  is  provided  with  an  associated  uncertainty  that  may  reflect  only  measurement 
precision, may not include all sources of uncertainty, or may reflect a lack of sufficient statistical agreement among 
  Based  on  the  method  used,  the  measurand  is  the  mass  fraction  of 
multiple  analytical  methods [1]. 
5,24-cholestadiene-3β-ol.  Metrological traceability is to the SI derived unit for mass fraction (expressed as a percent). 
 
 
 
This  reference  value  is  the  equally  weighted  mean  of  results  obtained  from  the  analytical  methods.    The  expanded 
uncertainty in the certified concentration is calculated as U = kuc.  The quantity uc is the combined standard uncertainty 
calculated based on a Bayesian approach in reference 3 and ISO/JCGM Guide [2].  The coverage factor, k = 2, represents 
an approximate 95 % level of confidence. 
 
Expiration  of  SRM  Certificate:    The  certification  of  SRM 911c  is  valid,  within  the  measurement  uncertainty 
in  accordance  with  instructions  given  in 
specified, until 31 December 2024, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with instructions given in 
this  certificate  (see  “Instructions  for  Storage  and  Use”).    The  certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is  damaged, 
contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Overall  direction  and  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  the  certification  were  provided  by 
M.J. Welch of the NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  11 May 2016 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Steven J. Choquette, Acting Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

Reference 5,24-Cholestadiene-3β-ol Mass Fraction: 

0.72 %  ±  0.13 % 

Storage  and  Use”). 

NIST

The 

Page 1 of 3 

  

SRM 911c 

Analyses were performed at NIST by M.M. Schantz, L.T. Sniegoski, S. S-C Tai, M. Bedner, and M.J. Welch of the 
NIST Chemical Sciences Division and D.K. Hancock of the NIST Biochemical Sciences Division. 
 
Statistical consultation was provided by N.F. Zhang of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Office  of  Reference 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
SOURCE, PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
The material was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) who performed a vacuum drying step on the material 
prior to shipping it to NIST. 
 
Proton  NMR  was  used  to  detect  and  identify  impurities  in  the  SRM.    The  primary  impurity  identified  is 
5,24-cholestadiene-3β-ol.    In  addition  there  are  much  smaller  amounts  of  5,25-cholestadiene-3β-ol  and  two  other 
unidentified steroids.   
 
Isotope dilution gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (ID/GS/MS) was used to compare the purity of SRM 911c 
with SRM 911b, the previous lot of this SRM [4].  Gas chromatography with flame ionization detection was performed 
using  two  different  stationary  phases.    LC/MS  and  LC/UV  were  used  to  measure  impurity  levels,  particularly 
5,24-cholestadiene-3β-ol. 
 
NOTICE AND WARNING TO USERS 
 
SRM 911c IS INTENDED FOR REASEACH USE. 
 
STORAGE  AND  USE 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage:  SRM 911c should be stored in a tightly‐closed bottle at or below room temperature (–20 °C to 23 °C is 
recommended).  It should not be subjected to heat, direct sunlight or sources of ultraviolet radiation.  For extended 
periods of storage after opening, the material should be kept at or below room temperature in a desiccator under inert 
gas.    It  should  be  allowed  to  warm  to  room  temperature  before  opening.    If  this  procedure  is  followed,  drying  is 
unnecessary.  Experience at NIST, where SRM 911a, a previous lot, was stored under inert gas at −15 °C, indicated 
that SRM 911c stored under the same conditions may be stable for as many as 10 years.  If the purity of the material 
degrades beyond the limits certified, purchasers will be notified by NIST.  If the material is stored in a refrigerator 
(2 °C to 8 °C), it is recommended that the material should not be used after three years from the date of shipment from 
NIST.  If it is stored in the dark at room temperature, it is recommended that the material not be used after six months 
from the date of shipment from NIST. 
 
Preparation  of  Stock  Standard  Solution: 
in  ethanol 
(5.00 mmol/L ± 0.02 mmol/L) may be prepared by dissolving 194.9 mg ± 0.1 mg of SRM 911c in 50 mL of  warm 
absolute ethanol in a 100.0 mL volumetric flask, allowing the solution to cool, and diluting to exactly 100.0 mL with 
ethanol [5].  The 5.00 mmol/L solution of cholesterol in ethanol should be stored in an all-glass, tightly-stoppered 
bottle at 0 °C.  Under such conditions this solution should be stable for about four months [6]. 
 
sult 
Solutions of cholesterol in glacial acetic acid gradually form cholesteryl acetate when stored and errors may result 
when using this solution [7]. 
 
All constituted solutions of cholesterol should be clear and display no turbidity. 

  A  stock  standard  solution  of  cholesterol 

                                                           

(1)   Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards 
ndards 
and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
se.
SRM 911c 

Page 2 of 3 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  May, W.; Parris, R.; Beck II, C.; Fassett, J.; Greenberg, R.; Guenther, F.; Kramer, G.; Wise, S.; Gills, T.; Colbert, J.; 
Gettings, R.;  MacDonald, B.;  Definitions  of  Terms  and  Modes  Used  at  NIST  for  Value-Assignment  of  Reference 
Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136;  U.S. Government  Printing  Office:  
Washington, DC (2000); available at: http://www.nist.gov/srm/publications.cfm (accessed May 2016). 

[2]  JCGM 100:2008; Evaluation of Measurement Data — Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections); Joint Committee  for Guides in Metrology (JCGM) (2008); available at 
http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf  (accessed  May  2016);  see  also 
Taylor, B.N.;  Kuyatt, C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST  Measurement 
Results;  NIST  Technical  Note 1297,  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  Washington, DC  (1994);  available  at 
http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed May 2016). 

[3]  Liu, H.K.; Zhang, N F.; Bayesian Approach to Combining Results from Multiple Methods; proceedings of the 

Section of Bayesian Statistical Science of American Statistical Society (2001). 

[4]  Ellerbe, P.; Meiselman, S.; Sniegoski, L.T.; Welch, M.J.; White V, E.; Determination of Serum Cholesterol by a 
Modification  of  the  Isotope  Dilution  Mass  Spectrometric  Definitive  Method;  Anal.  Chem.,  Vol.  61, 
pp. 1718−1723 (1989). 

[5]  Fundamental of Clinical Chemistry; Tietz, N, Ed.; W.B. Saunders Co.: Philadelphia, PA, p. 358 (1970). 
[6]  Henry, R.D.; Clinical Chemistry, Principles and Technics; Hoeber Medical Division, Harper & Row: New York, 

[7]  Klein, B.; Kleinman, N.B.; Esterification of Cholesterol in Glacial Acetic Acid; Clin. Chem., Vol. 20, pp. 90−91 

p. 854 (1967). 

(1974). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Certificate Revision History:  11 May 2016 (Updated storage information; editorial changes); 06 January 2016 (Editorial changes); 28 July 2014 
(Extension of certification period, editorial changes); 12 May 2009 (Changed the “Instructions for Use” for the amount of cholesterol used in the 
 
stock standard solution from 193.7 mg to 194.9 mg ± 0.1 mg);  10 August 2007 (Original certificate date). 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This  can  be 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program:    telephone  (301)  975-2200;  fax  (301)  948-3730;  e-mail 
mailto:srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

€@ 

» 

SRM 911c 

Page 3 of 3 

