ENT  OF 

 
,
p
E

 
*

 
t
o

 
?

Staves  oF 

hy. 

 
e
y
 
%
0
3

 
.
a
c
 M
 %
%

,

National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Certificate of Analysis 
Standard Reference Material® 913b 

 

 

 
Uric Acid 

 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is certified as a chemical of known purity.  It is intended primarily for use 
in the calibration and standardization of procedures for uric acid determinations employed in clinical analysis and for 
routine critical evaluation of the daily working standards used in these procedures.  A unit of SRM 913b consists of 
one bottle containing 10 g of crystalline uric acid.  
 
Certified Value and Uncertainty:  The certified value is based upon the results from several analytical techniques 
designed to measure impurities and on scientific judgement of these results.  The certified chemical purity presented 
in Table 1 was determined by measuring the mass fractions of impurities, including water and residue from ashing, 
summing the impurities and subtracting this sum from 100 %.  A NIST certified value is a value for which NIST has 
the  highest  confidence  in  its  accuracy  in  that  all  known  or  suspected  sources  of  bias  have  been  investigated  or 
accounted for by NIST [1]. 

 
Table 1.  Certified Chemical Purity and Uncertainty for Uric Acid (Mass Fraction) 

 

99.8 %  ±  0.2 % 

 
The results are expressed as the certified value ± the expanded uncertainty.  The uncertainty in the certified value is 
equal  to  U  =  kuc,  where,  uc,  is  the  combined  standard  uncertainty  calculated  according  to  the  ISO/JCGM 
Guide [2] and, k = 2, is the coverage factor.  The expanded uncertainty is intended to represent a 95 % confidence 
interval and reflects the combined effects of measurement imprecision, variability in concentrations between bottles 
and any systematic differences between techniques when more than one method has been used [2]. The measurand is 
the total concentration of uric acid and the certified value is metrologically traceable to the SI unit of mass, expressed 
as percent. 
 
Reference Values:  Reference values are noncertified values that are the best estimates of the true values; however, 
the values do not meet NIST criteria for certification.  Such values are provided with associated uncertainties that may 
reflect only  measurement precision,  may  not include all sources of  uncertainty, or may  reflect a lack of  sufficient 
statistical agreement among multiple analytical  methods [1].  Reference values for mass loss upon drying, residue 
after ashing, and molar extinction coefficients are provided in Table 2. 
 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 913b is valid, within the measurement uncertainty specified, 
with  instructions  given  in  this  certificate 
until 01 January 2024, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with instructions given in this certificate 
(see  “Instructions  for  Storage  and  Use”).    This  certification  is  nullified  if  the  SRM  is  damaged,  contaminated,  or 
otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Coordination of the technical activities leading to the certification of this SRM were performed by J.E. Camara of the 
NIST Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
Acquisition  of  the  material  was  performed  by  K.W.  Phinney  of  the  NIST  Biomolecular  Measurement  Division.  
Certification measurements at NIST were performed by L.T. Sniegoski, M.J. Welch, and J.S. Pritchett of the NIST 
Chemical Sciences Division. 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  11 June 2014 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzalez, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

Storage  and  Use”).

fFSRM~ 

ib 

Page 1 of 3 

SRM 913b 

  

the 

is 

25 

20 

storage 

STORAGE  AND 

Statistical analysis of the data was provided by N-F. Zhang of the NIST Statistical Engineering Division. 
 
Office  of  Reference 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR STORAGE AND USE 
 
Storage:  SRM 913b should be stored in its original bottle at temperatures between 20 °C and 25 °C.  It must be 
tightly re-capped after use and protected from excessive moisture and light. 
 
Use:  SRM 913b is not hygroscopic under ordinary storage conditions (as described above) and can be used without 
preliminary drying.  The minimum sample size required is 10 mg.  
 
SOURCE AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
L  commercial  supplier. 
Source of Material:  The SRM material was obtained from a commercial supplier. 
 
Analytical Approach:  All analyses for the certified and reference values were performed at NIST.  Because uric acid 
potential 
does not melt, differential scanning calorimetry could not be used as an overall measure of the purity.  Instead, potential 
impurities  were  evaluated  using  a  variety  of 
liquid  chromatography-mass 
spectrometry (LC-MS), gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS), mass loss upon drying, ashing at 800 °C, 
and ultraviolet (UV) spectroscopy.  The results for the drying and ashing analyses are shown in Table 2.  Other low 
termined 
level impurities may be present but were not detected by the techniques used here.  The certified purity is determined 
by subtracting from 100 %, the sum of the mass loss upon drying and the residue after ashing. 
 
Homogeneity  Analysis:    The  homogeneity  assessment  was  made  at  the  time  the  certification  analyses  were 
performed.  A stratified sampling plan was devised to test for homogeneity across the lot of bottles.  There was no 
apparent trend in the data when plotted against the sequence in which the bottles were prepared.  
 
Molar extinction coefficients were measured for solutions of SRM 913b in a glycine-NaOH aqueous buffer (pH 9.6) 
and 0.0017 mol/L ammonia (pH 10.1) at 234 nm and 292 nm.  The results for the molar extinction coefficients are 
also shown in Table 2. 
 
 

asured  for  solutions 

techniques 

included: 

|  reference 

that 

234 

Table 2.  Reference Values for Selected Properties of SRM 913b(a) 
 

SRM 

 

Components of Impurity 
 

Mass loss upon drying 
Residue after ashing  

UV Absorbance of Uric Acid 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

Mass Fraction(b)  

(%) 

 

0.13  ±  0.02 
0.06  ±  0.01 

Molar Extinction Coefficients(c) 
(L·mol-1·cm-1) 

234 nm 

292 nm 

In glycine-NaOH buffer, pH 9.6 
In ammonia solution, pH 10.1 

 
 
 
equal  to 
(a) The results are expressed as the reference value ± the expanded uncertainty.  The uncertainty in the reference value is equal to 
k
U = kuc, where, uc, is the combined standard uncertainty calculated according to the ISO/JCGM Guide [2] and, k = 2, is 
the coverage factor.  The expanded uncertainty is intended to represent a 95 % confidence interval. 

12 507 ±  43 
12 515 ± 168 

9 820 ± 27 
9 549 ± 70 

(b) The measurand is the mass fraction of mass loss upon drying and residue after ashing as determined by the method indicated.  

The reference value is metrologically traceable to the SI unit of mass expressed as percent. 

(c) The measurand is the molar extinction coefficient as determined by the method indicated.  The reference value is metrologically 

traceable to the SI units volume, amount of substance, and length expressed as L·mol-1·cm-1. 

and  length  expressed  as  L 

 

                                                 

(1)Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, nor does it imply that the instruments, materials, or processes identified are necessarily the best available for the 
purpose. 
SRM 913b 

Page 2 of 3 

REFERENCES 

 
[1]  May, W.; Parris, R.; Beck II, C.; Fassett, J.; Greenberg, R.; Guenther, F.; Kramer, G.; Wise, S.; Gills, T.; Colbert, J.; 
Gettings, R.; MacDonald, B.;  Definitions of  Terms and Modes Used at NIST for Value-Assignment of Reference 
Materials  for  Chemical  Measurements;  NIST  Special  Publication  260-136;  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office:  
Washington, DC (2000); available at: http://www.nist.gov/srm/publications.cfm (accessed June 2014). 

[2]  JCGM  100:2008;  Evaluation  of  Measurement  Data  -  Guide  to  the  Expression  of  Uncertainty  in 
Measurement;(GUM 1995 with Minor Corrections), Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (JCGM) (2008); 
available at http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_100_2008_E.pdf (accessed June 2014); 
see  also  Taylor,  B.N.;  Kuyatt,  C.E.;  Guidelines  for  Evaluating  and  Expressing  the  Uncertainty  of  NIST 
Measurement Results; NIST Technical Note 1297, U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC (1994); 
available at http://www.nist.gov/pml/pubs/index.cfm (accessed June 2014). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[his  can  be 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
948-
accomplished  by  contacting 
(301)  948-3730; 
 
e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

the  SRM  Program: 

(301)  975-2200; 

telephone 

fax 

SRM 913b 

Page 3 of 3 

