 

a 

ny 

:  Ba  :  National  Institute  of  Standards  &  Cechnologu 

 

Gertificate  of  Analysis

 

 
Standard Reference Material® 914a 
 
Creatinine 
 
 
This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is certified as a chemical of known purity.  It is intended primarily for use 
in the calibration and standardization of procedures used for determination of creatinine concentration and for routine 
evaluations of daily working standards used in these procedures.   
 
The certified purity for this SRM is shown below.  The estimated uncertainty of the purity is based upon scientific 
judgment and statistical analysis of the numerous analytical tests applied to the material in the certification process.   
 

99.7    0.3 % 

 
Expiration of Certification:  The certification of SRM 914a is valid for 5 years from the date of shipment from 
NIST, within the measurement uncertainty specified, provided the SRM is handled and stored in accordance with 
the  instructions  given  in  this  certificate  (see  “Instructions  for  Handling,  Storage,  and  Use”).    The  certification  is 
nullified if the SRM is damaged, contaminated, or otherwise modified. 
 
Maintenance of SRM Certification:  NIST will monitor this SRM over the period of its certification.  If substantive 
technical  changes  occur  that  affect  the  certification  before  the  expiration  of  this  certificate,  NIST  will  notify  the 
purchaser.  Registration (see attached sheet or register online) will facilitate notification. 
 
Contributions to the certification and characterization of this SRM were made by A. Cohen, B. Coxon, S.A. Margolis, 
and  E. White V  of  the  former  NIST  Organic  Analytical  Research  Division  and  M. Knoerdel,  W.F. Koch, 
G. Marinenko, and S.F. Stone of the former NIST Inorganic Analytical Research Division. 
 
Overall  direction  and  coordination  of  the  technical  measurements  leading  to  the  certification  were  provided  by 
R. Schaffer of the former NIST Organic Analytical Research Division. 
 
Statistical consultation and analyses were provided by R.C. Paule, formerly of NIST. 
 
Support  aspects  involved  in  the  issuance  of  this  SRM  were  coordinated  through  the  NIST  Office  of  Reference 
Materials. 
 
This Certificate of Analysis has undergone editorial revision to reflect program and organizational changes at NIST and 
at  the  Department  of  Commerce.   No  attempt  was  made  to  reevaluate  the  certificate  values  or  any  technical  data 
presented on this certificate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899 
Certificate Issue Date:  16 December 2015 
Certificate Revision History on Last Page 

Robert L. Watters, Jr., Director 
Office of Reference Materials 

Carlos A. Gonzales, Chief 
Chemical Sciences Division 

 

SRM 914a 

Page 1 of 2 

NOTICE AND WARNINGS TO USERS  
 
SRM 914a IS INTENDED FOR RESEARCH USE.   
 
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HANDLING, STORAGE, AND USE 
 
Storage:  This SRM should be stored tightly closed, preferably in its original container, at room temperature (30 C 
or less).  It should not be subjected to heat or direct sunlight during storage.  Refrigerated storage is recommended.  
 
Use:  We do not recommend heat and/or vacuum treatment for reducing the water content of the material.  A "stock" 
standard  solution  containing  1 mg/mL  of  creatinine  may  be  prepared  by  weighing  0.1003 g  of  SRM 914a  into  a 
100 mL  volumetric  flask,  filling  the  flask  nearly  to  the  mark  with  0.1 mol/L  hydrochloric  acid,  agitating  until 
dissolution of the creatinine is achieved, followed by filling the flask to the mark with 0.1 mol/L hydrochloric acid.  
This solution  should be stored in a refrigerator.  A "working" standard containing 20 μg/mL of creatinine  may be 
prepared by diluting 2.0 mL of the "stock" standard solution to 100 mL with distilled water in a volumetric flask [1].  
This "working" standard solution should be prepared daily. 
 
Stability of Prepared Solutions:  The "stock" standard solution containing 1 mg/mL, prepared as described above, 
is stable indefinitely when stored in a refrigerator at 4 C in a well-stoppered, all-glass container.  The dilute "working" 
standard solution should be prepared daily from the "stock" standard solution [2]. 
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS(1) 
 
The  homogeneity  of  the  SRM  was  measured  by  acidimetric  titration.    Purity  of  the  SRM  was  determined  by  an 
evaluation of both the results of acidimetric titration and the results of a number of analytical procedures to detect and 
measure potential impurities in the SRM.  A number of additional analyses, which provide values of components of 
the  material  were  performed  to  characterize  the  material.    These  are  described  below  and  are  provided  for 
informational purposes only. 
 
The following values are not certified but are provided as they may be of interest to the user of this SRM.  Moisture 
was determined by Karl Fischer titration to be 0.07 % by weight.  The total ash of the material was 0.002 %.  Insoluble 
matter upon dissolution in water was 0.005 %.  Soluble chloride by ion chromatography was 0.0014 %; total chloride 
by neutron activation analysis was approximately 0.002 %.  Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy detected no 
impurities except methanol at 0.003 %.  Elemental analysis by neutron activation analysis indicates, in addition to 
chloride,  the  presence  of  the  following  elements  at  the  indicated  approximate  levels:    Na,  0.4 μmol/mole; 
Mg, 3 μmol/mole; Al, 0.4 μmol/mole; K, 4 μmol/mole; Mn, 0.02 μmol/mole; Cu, 0.4 μmol/mole; Cr, 0.1 μmol/mole; 
Fe, 1.5 μmol/mole; Co, 0.2 μmol/mole; and Zn, 0.2 μmol/mole.    
 
 

 
REFERENCES 

 
[1]  Tietz, N.W., Fundamentals of Clinical Chemistry, W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, PA, pp. 722-726 (1970). 
[2]  Henry, R.D., Clinical Chemistry, Principles and Techniques, Hoeber Medical Division, Harper & Row, New 

York, NY, pp. 292-302 (1967) 

 
 
Certificate  Revision  History:    16 December 2015  (Editorial  changes);  08 February 1994  (Editorial  changes);  01 October 1984  (Original 
certificate issue date).  
 
 
 
Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program:  telephone  (301)  975-2200;  fax  (301)  948-3730;  e-mail 
srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

                                                           

(1) Certain  commercial  equipment,  instruments,  or  materials  are  identified  in  this  certificate  to  adequately  specify  the 
experimental procedure.  Such identification does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology, nor does it imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
SRM 914a 

Page 2 of 2 

