SRM Number: 114p  
MSDS Number: 114p 
SRM Name: Portland Cement Fineness  

Standard 
Issued: April, 1994 

MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEET 
 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Standard Reference Materials Program 
Gaithersburg, Maryland  20899 
(301) 975-2019  

 
SECTION I. MATERIAL IDENTIFICATION   

 
Material Name:  Portland Cement Fineness Standard 
 
Other Designations:   Hydraulic Cement, Portland Cement Silicate 
 
Description:  This SRM unit consists of approximately 200 grams of powdered cement, packaged in 20 sealed laminated 
barrier film pouches, each containing approximately 10 g of cement. 
 
Chemical Formulas:  Tricalcium silicate (3CaO•SiO2) and dicalcium silicate (2CaO•SiO2) are portland cements essential 
constituents, along with varying amounts of alumina, tricalcium aluminate and iron oxide as tetracalcium aluminoferrate.  
Small amounts of magnesia, sodium, potassium and sulfur are also present.  Chromium may be present in the finished cement 
since the kiln's refractory lining and the steel balls used in the finish-milling operations are possible sources.  To improve 
adhesion, strength and flexibility, cement may be modified with various plastic latexes.  
 
CAS Reg. No.:  65997-15-1 
 
DOT Classification:  Not hazardous by DOT regulations. 
 
Manufacturer/ Supplier:  Available from a number of suppliers. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
SECTION II. HAZARDOUS INGREDIENTS 

 
Hazardous Components 

 
Percent Concentrations 

 
Limits and Toxicity Data* 

 
CaO  (calcium oxide) 
 
SiO2  (silicon dioxide) 
 
Al2O3  (aluminum oxide) 
 
Fe2O3  (iron III oxide 
 
SO3  (sulfur trioxide) 
 
MgO  (magnesium oxide) 
 
K2O  (potassium oxide) 
 
TiO2  (titanium dioxide) 
 
Na2O  (sodium monoxide) 
 
SrO  (strontium oxide) 
 
P2O5  (phosphoric anhydride) 

 
   63.6 
 
   21.6 
 
     4.2 
 
     3.0 
 
     2.7 
 
     2.4 
 
     0.51 
 
     0.23 
 
     0.19 
 
     0.14 
 
     0.19 

 
8 hr. TWA-PEL 
 
    10 mg/m3 (total dust) 
 
 
 
8 hr. TWA-PEL 
 
     5 mg/m3 (respirable fraction) 
 
 
 
ACGIH TLV-TWA: 
 
    10 mg/m3 (nuisance dust) 
 
 
 
No toxicity data documented. 
 
 

 
SECTION III. PHYSICAL/ CHEMICAL CHARACTERISTICS  

 
Appearance and Odor:  Odorless, grey powder.  
Vapor Pressure:  approximately 0 mm 
pH:  12 (wet cement) 
Solubility in Water:  Insoluble. 
 

 
SECTION IV. FIRE AND EXPLOSION HAZARD DATA  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Flash Point:  N/A 
 
(Method Used):  N/A 
 
Autoignition Temperature:  N/A 
 
Flammability Limits in Air (Volume %):  N/A 
 

 
Extinguishing Media:  This material is noncombustible.  Use extinguishing media that is appropriate to the surrounding fire. 
  

 
Special Fire Procedures:  Since the fire may produce toxic fumes, wear a self contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) with a 
full facepiece operated in the pressure-demand or positive-pressure mode.   
 
Unusual Fire and Explosion Hazards:  None reported. 
 

 

 

 
SECTION V. REACTIVITY DATA 

 
Stability:          X       Stable                       Unstable 
 
Conditions to Avoid:  Avoid moisture. 
 
Incompatibility (Materials to Avoid):  No hazardous incompatibilities are reported. 
 
Hazardous Decomposition or Byproducts:  Calcium hydroxide forms when water is added to portland cement; this is an 
alkaline, abrasive and hygroscopic (moisture-absorbing) material. 
 
Hazardous Polymerization:                          WIll Occur            X        Will Not Occur 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
SECTION VI. HEALTH HAZARD DATA  

 
Route of Entry:          X         Inhalation                X        Skin                  X         Ingestion 
 
Health Hazards (Acute and Chronic):  Silicon Dioxide:  Portland cement is a nuisance dust and an irritant to the skin, eyes 
and mucous membranes.  Its principle health hazard occurs from the formation of  alkaline calcium hydroxide (forming from 
the addition of water to portland cement); this material is abrasive and can burn the skin.  Dry cement will not cause alkaline 
burns.  Some individuals appear to tolerate brief skin contact with wet cement but others develop extensive skin burns.  
Repeated or prolonged skin contact can cause dermatitis, including skin dryness, fissures (cracks in the skin), eczematous 
rashes and dystrophy (a condition caused by defective nutrition) of the nails.  Extensive burns with dermal necrosis (localized 
death of living tissue) can occur.  Allergic dermatitis may result from the presence of heavy metals such as chromium in the 
mixture.  
Splashes into the eyes can cause corneal edema.  Ingestion of the powder may cause burns to the esophagus and stomach.  
Chronic bronchitis may result from long term exposure.  There are reports of x-ray changes without symptoms in cement 
workers exposed to portland cement.  Other studies showing x-ray changes with pulmonary symptoms are noted in workers 
exposed primarily to the silica-containing products in portland cement. 
 
Signs and Symptoms of Exposure:  Inhalation symptoms include eye, nose and upper respiratory tract irritation, cough, 
expectoration, shortness of breath and wheezing.  Within 12 to 48 hours after 1-to-6 hour exposures, first, second and/or third 
degree burns may occur.  There may be no obvious pain at the time of exposure.  Allergic reactions and changes in x-rays are 
also signs of exposure. 
 
Medical Conditions Generally Aggravated by Exposure:  Individuals with a sensitivity to hexachromium salts should 
avoid exposure.  Individuals with  chronic respiratory disorders or skin diseases should minimize exposure. 
 
Calcium Oxide:  Inhalation of 250 mg/m3 of calcium oxide is immediately dangerous to life and health.  Inhalation may cause 
severe irriation of the mucous membranes with sore throat, coughing 
 

 
Listed as a Carcinogen/Potential Carcinogen: 

In the National Toxicology Program (NTP) Report on Carcinogens  
In the International Agency for Research (IARC) Monographs        
By the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)   

Yes 
____ 
____ 
____ 

No 
_X_ 
_X_ 
_X_ 

 
EMERGENCY AND FIRST AID PROCEDURES: 

 

 

 

 

 

Skin Contact:  Remove contaminated shoes and clothing.  Rinse affected area with large amounts of water followed by 
washing the area with soap and water.  Contact medical assistance if necessary. 
 
Eye Contact:  Immediately flush eyes, including under eyelids, with copious amounts of water until victim is transported 
to an emergency medical facility.   Contact a physician immediately!  This material can cause corneal edema! 
 
Inhalation:  Move the victim to fresh air.  If breathing is difficult, give oxygen; if victim is not breathing, give artificial 
respiration.  Contact medical assistance if necessary. 
 
Ingestion:  Never give anything by mouth to an unconscious or convulsing person.  If ingested, have the conscious victim 
drink 4 to 8 oz. of milk or water.  Contact a physician immediately. 
 

Note  to  Physician:    Ingestion  of  large  amounts  of  cement  is  unlikely.    However,    to  prevent 
re-exposing  the  esophagus  and  the  stomach,  do  not  induce  emesis  or  perform  gastric  lavage.  
Immediate  dilution  may  prevent  esophageal  burns.    For  severe  espohageal  burns,  consider 
esophagoscopy within the first 24 hours.  Neutralization with acidic agents is not advised because of 
the increased risk of  exothermic burns.   

 

Water-mineral oil soaks may aid in the removal of  hardened cement from the skin.  Dried on cement is 
extremely difficult to remove; surgical debridement and possibly even skin grafting may be necessary. 
 Consult an opthalmologist for ocular burns.  Consider topical mydriatic-cycloplegics to guard against 
development of posterior synechiae and ciliary spasm. 

TARGET ORGAN(S) OF ATTACK:  The upper respiratory tract (URT), skin, digestive tract and eyes. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
SECTION VII. PRECAUTIONS FOR SAFE HANDLING AND USE 

 
Steps to be taken in Case Material is Released or Spilled:  Notify safety personnel of large leaks.  Provide adequate 
ventilation.  Cleanup personnel  must be protected against dust inhalation and direct contact with the wet cement.  Avoid 
creating airborne dust conditions.  Cleanup methods such as vacuuming (with an appropriate filter) or wet mopping minimizes 
dust dispersion.  Carefully scoop up spilled dry material  into a suitable container (with secure lid) for disposal or reclamation. 
  

 
Waste Disposal:  Contact your local, licensed contractor for detailed recommendations.  Follow all Federal, state and local 
regulations. 
 

 
Handling and Storage:  Those handling portland cement should wear protective eyeglasses or chemical safety goggles, per 
OSHA eye and face protection regulations.  Wear other protective clothing such as gloves, boots and aprons to prevent skin 
contact.  Wear a NIOSH approved respirator for prolonged exposure or exposures above the TLV.  Warning: Air-purifying 
respirators will not protect workers in an oxygen-deficient atmosphere.   
 
Never eat, drink or smoke in the work area.  Launder soiled clothing before wearing. 
 

Note: Contact lenses pose a special problem; soft lenses may absorb irritants and all lenses concentrate them.  DO NOT 
wear contact lenses in the lab. 

 
Provide general and local ventilation systems to maintain airborne concentrations below the OSHA PELs and ACGIH TLV.  
Local exhaust ventilation is preferred since it prevents contaminant dispersion into the work area by controlling it at its source. 
 Store in tightly closed containers in a cool, dry, well ventilated area.  Protect containers from physical damage. 
 

 
SECTION VIII. SOURCE DATA/ OTHER COMMENTS 

 
Sources:   Genium Publishing Corporation, MSDS No. 718, August, 1990. 

Hawley's Condensed Chemical Dictionary, 11th ed., 1987. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Carmelita S. Davis   (301) 975-6439 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Standard Reference Materials Program 
Gaithersburg, Maryland  20899 

Note:  Physical and chemical data contained in this MSDS are provided for use in assessing the hazardous nature of the 
material.  The MSDS was prepared carefully, using current references, however NIST does not certify the data on the 
MSDS.  The certified values for this material are given only on the NIST Certificate of Analysis. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

