 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE:  25 November 2014 
 
Product Identifier 

SRM Number:   1484a 
SRM Name:   

Linear Polyethylene 

Under the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 29 CFR 1910.1200, 
this  Standard  Reference  Material  (SRM)  is  NOT  classified  as  a  physical  hazard  or  a  health  hazard,  a  simple 
asphyxiant, combustible dust, pyrophoric gas, or hazard not otherwise classified. There are no hazard pictograms, 
hazard statements or signal word associated with it.  Safety Data Sheet information is not required.  This document 
may be used in conjunction with your hazard communication program. 
 
This material is formed to a specific shape or design during manufacture which under normal conditions of use does 
not release more than very small quantities, e.g., minute or trace amounts of a hazardous chemical (as determined 
under paragraph (d) of 1910.1200), and does not pose a physical hazard or health risk to employees. 

Description:  This SRM is intended for the calibration and evaluation of instruments used in polymer technology 
and  science  for  the  determination  of  molecular  weight  and  molecular  weight  distribution,  and  for  use  as  a 
characterized sample for measurements of other physical properties of linear polyethylene.  This SRM is supplied as 
a granular polyethylene in a 0.3 g unit. 
 
Disposal:  SRM 1484a should be disposed of in accordance with local, state, and federal regulations. 
 
Transport  Information:    This  material  is  not  regulated  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Transportation  (DOT)  and/or 
International Air Transportation Association (IATA). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:  This document was prepared carefully, using current references.  Users of this SRM should ensure that 
this  document  and  the  corresponding  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  are  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program:    telephone  (301)  975-2200;  fax  (301)  948-3730;  e-mail 
srmmsds@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

SRM 1484a 

 

Page 1 of 1 

