 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE:  04 January 2016 
 
Product Identifier 

SRM Number:  1598a 
SRM Name: 

Inorganic Constituents in Animal Serum 

Under the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health  Administration (OSHA) 29 CFR 1910.1200, 
this Standard Reference Material (SRM) is NOT classified as a physical hazard or a health hazard, a simple asphyxiant, 
combustible  dust,  pyrophoric  gas,  or  hazard  not  otherwise  classified.    There  are  no  hazard  pictograms,  hazard 
statements or signal word associated with it.  Safety Data Sheet information is not required.  This document may be 
used in conjunction with your hazard communication program. 
 
Exemption:  1910.1200 (b) (6) (xii).  This SRM is a biological material and should be considered a potential biological 
hazard. 
 
Description:  This SRM is a serum sample derived from a mixture of serum from healthy bovine and porcine animals.  
The  SRM  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  calibrating  instrumentation  and  evaluating  the  accuracy  of  analytical 
methods for selected elements in blood serum, plasma, and similar biological fluids.  A unit of SRM 1598a consists 
of two capped polyethylene vials, each containing 5 mL to 6 mL of frozen serum. 
 
Additional Notes for Biomaterials:  SRM 1598a IS A MIXTURE OF SERUM FROM HEALTHY BOVINE AND 
PORCINE  ANIMALS,  AND  IS  INTENDED  FOR  RESEARCH  USE.    The  animals  were  inspected  by  a  USDA 
Veterinary Medical Officer and did not show signs of infectious, contagious, or communicable disease.  This SRM 
should be handled at the Biosafety Level 2 or higher as recommended for any potentially infectious human serum or 
blood specimen by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Office of Safety, Health, and Environment 
and the National Institutes of Health (NIH).  See Certificate of Analysis for storage and use instructions.   
 
Disposal:  SRM 1598a components and derived solutions should be disposed of in accordance with local, state, and 
federal regulations. 
 
Transport  Information:    This  material  is  not  regulated  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Transportation (DOT)  and/or 
International Air Transport Association (IATA). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:   This document was prepared carefully, using current references.  Users of this SRM should ensure that 
this document and the corresponding Certificate of Analysis in their possession are current.  This can be accomplished 
by contacting the SRM Program:  telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srmmsds@nist.gov; or via 
the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 
 

SRM 1598a 

 

Page 1 of 1 

