 
SAFETY DATA SHEET 

Date of Issue: 
12 March 2014 

 
1.  SUBSTANCE AND SOURCE IDENTIFICATION  

Product Identifier 
SRM Number: 
SRM Name: 
Other Means of Identification:  Not applicable. 

1633c 
Trace Elements in Coal Fly Ash 

Recommended Use of This Material and Restrictions of Use 

This  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  intended  for  use  in  the  evaluation  of  analytical  methods  for  the 
determination  of  constituent  elements  in  coal  fly  ash  or  materials  of  a  similar  matrix.    SRM 1633c  is  a 
bituminous coal fly ash that was sieved through a nominal sieve opening of 74 µm (200 mesh) and then blended 
to assure homogeneity.  A unit of SRM 1633c consists of 75 g of powdered material. 

Company Information 

National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Standard Reference Materials Program 
100 Bureau Drive, Stop 2300 
Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899-2300 
 
Telephone:  301-975-2200 
FAX:  301-948-3730 
E-mail:  SRMMSDS@nist.gov 
Website:  http://www.nist.gov/srm 

 
 
 
 
 
Emergency Telephone ChemTrec: 
  1-800-424-9300 
 +1-703-527-3887 
 

(North America) 
(International) 

2.  HAZARDS IDENTIFICATION 

Note:  This  material  is  a  complex  mixture  that  contains  respirable  crystalline  silica  as  quartz.    The  health  and 
physical  hazard  information  provided  in  this  SDS  contains  the  effects  associated  with  the  inhalation  of  quartz 
particulates at a concentration ≥1 %. 

Classification  

Physical Hazard: Not classified. 
Health Hazard:  Carcinogen 
 

STOT, Repeated Exposure  

 

Category 1 
Category 1 

Label Elements 
Symbol  

 

Signal Word 
DANGER 

Hazard Statement(s): 
H350 
H372 

May cause lung cancer. 
Causes damage to lungs through prolonged or repeated inhalation. 

Precautionary Statement(s): 
P201 
P202 
P260 
P264 
P270 
P280 

Obtain special instructions before use. 
Do not handle until all safety precautions have been read and understood. 
Do not breathe dust. 
Wash hands thoroughly after handling. 
Do not eat, drink or smoke when using this product. 
Wear protective gloves, protective clothing, and eye protection. 

P308 + P313  If exposed or concerned:  Get medical attention. 
 

SRM 1633c 

 

Page 1 of 6 

 

P405 

P501 

Store locked up. 

Dispose of contents and container in accordance with local regulations. 

Hazards Not Otherwise Classified:  Not applicable. 

Ingredients(s) with Unknown Acute Toxicity:  Not applicable. 

3.  COMPOSITION AND INFORMATION ON HAZARDOUS INGREDIENTS 

Substance:  Coal ashes, (residues) 

Other Designations:  Coal fly ash (ash; coal ash; fly ash; flyash; coal ash, by product; bottom ash) 

This material is a complex mixture that has not been tested as a whole and contains trace amounts of compounds 
which  have  been  reported  to  have  toxic,  mutagenic,  and/or  carcinogenic  properties,  and  should  be  handled  with 
care, including nickel, vanadium, and chromium compounds.  Components are listed in compliance with OSHA’s 
29 CFR 1910.1200; for the actual values see the NIST Certificate of Analysis. 

Hazardous Component(s)  CAS Number 

Coal fly ash 
Quartz 
 
4.  FIRST AID MEASURES 

68131-74-8 
14808-60-7 

Description of First Aid Measures:  

EC Number 
(EINECS) 

268-627-4 
238-878-4 

Nominal Mass Concentration 
(%) 

<99.0 
>1.0 

Inhalation:    If  adverse  effects  occur,  remove  to  uncontaminated  area.    If  not  breathing,  give  artificial 
respiration or oxygen by qualified personnel.  Seek immediate medical attention. 

Skin Contact:  Wash skin with soap and water for at least 15 minutes.  Thoroughly clean and dry contaminated 
clothing before reuse. 

Eye Contact:  Flush eyes with water for at least 15 minutes.  If necessary, seek medical attention. 

Ingestion:  If adverse effects occur after ingestion, seek medical treatment. 

Most Important Symptoms/Effects, Acute and Delayed:  May cause irritation, lung damage, silicosis, and cancer.  

Indication of any immediate medical attention and special treatment needed, if necessary:  If any of the above 
symptoms are present, seek medical attention if needed. 

5.  FIRE FIGHTING MEASURES 

Fire  and  Explosion  Hazards:    Negligible  fire  hazard.    See  Section 9,  “Physical  and  Chemical  Properties”  for 
flammability properties. 

Extinguishing Media: 
 
 

Suitable:  Regular dry chemical, dry sand, water, and regular foam. 
Unsuitable:  None listed. 

Specific Hazards Arising from the Chemical:  None listed. 

Special Protective Equipment and Precautions for  Fire-Fighters:  Avoid inhalation of material or combustion 
byproducts.  Wear full protective clothing and NIOSH approved self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA). 

NFPA Ratings (0 = Minimal; 1 = Slight; 2 = Moderate; 3 = Serious; 4 = Severe) 
 

Reactivity = 0 

Health = 1 

Fire = 1 

6.  ACCIDENTAL RELEASE MEASURES 

Personal Precautions, Protective  Equipment and Emergency Procedures:  Use suitable protective equipment; 
see Section 8, “Exposure Controls and Personal Protection”. 

Methods  and  Materials  for  Containment  and  Clean  up:    Collect  spilled  material  in  appropriate  container  for 
disposal.   Keep out of  water  supplies and  sewers.   Keep  unnecessary people away,  isolate  hazard area  and deny 
entry. 

 

SRM 1633c 

 

Page 2 of 6 

7.  HANDLING AND STORAGE 

Safe Handling Precautions:  Minimize dust generation.  See Section 8, “Exposure Controls and Personal Protection”. 

Storage:    Store  and  handling  in  accordance  with  all  current  regulations  and  standards.    Keep  separated  from 
incompatible substances (oxidizing materials, bases, halogens, acids, metal salts, metals, combustible materials). 

8.  EXPOSURE CONTROLS AND PERSONAL PROTECTION 

Exposure Limits: 

Coal fly ash: 
 

OSHA (PEL): 

 

NIOSH (REL): 
 

Quartz: 

No exposure limits available. 
0.015 mg/m3 (TWA) [except Nickel carbonyl, as Ni, related to Nickel compounds] 
10 mg/m3 (IDLH) [except Nickel carbonyl, as Ni, related to Nickel compounds] 

ACGIH (TLV): 

OSHA (PEL):  
 
 

NIOSH (REL): 
 

0.025 mg/m3 (TWA) [respirable fraction] 
(30)/(%SiO2 + 2) mg/m3 (TWA) [total dust] 
(250)/(%SiO2 + 5) mppcf (TWA) [respirable fraction] 
(10)/(%SiO2 + 2) mg/m3 (TWA) [respirable fraction] 
0.05 mg/m3 (TWA) [respirable dust] 
50 mg/m3 (TWA) [respirable dust] 

Note:  The exposure limits listed take into consideration hazards associated with this material and are sufficient 
to protect against trace concentrations of vanadium and chromium (hexavalent chromium) compounds present. 

Engineering Controls:   Provide  local  exhaust  or  process  enclosure  ventilation  system.  Ensure  compliance  with 
applicable exposure limits. 

Personal Protection:  In accordance with OSHA 29 CFR 1910.132, subpart I, wear appropriate Personal Protective 
Equipment (PPE) to minimize exposure to this material. 

Respiratory Protection:    If workplace conditions warrant a respirator, a respiratory protection program that meets 
OSHA 29CFR 1910.134 must be followed.   Refer to NIOSH 42 CFR 84 for applicable certified respirators. 

Eye/Face  Protection:    Wear  splash  resistant  safety  goggles  with  a  face  shield.    An  eyewash  station  should  be 
readily available near areas of use. 

Skin  and  Body  Protection:    Personal  protective  equipment  for  the  body  should  be  selected  based  on  the  task 
being  performed  and  the  risks  involved  and  should  be  approved  by  a  specialist  before  handling  this  product.  
Chemical-resistant gloves should be worn at all times when handling chemicals. 

9.  PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES 
 

Descriptive Properties: 
Appearance  
(physical state, color, etc.): 
Molecular Formula: 
Molar Mass (g/mol): 
Odor: 
Odor threshold: 
pH: 
Evaporation rate: 
Melting point/freezing point (ºC): 
Relative Density (g/L): 
Vapor Pressure (mmHg): 
Vapor Density (air = 1): 
Viscosity (cP): 
Solubility(ies): 
Partition coefficient (n-octanol/water): 
Particle Size (if relevant): 

Coal Fly Ash 

grey to black granular powder 
varies 
varies 
not available 
not available 
not applicable 
not applicable 
not available 
not available 
not applicable 
not applicable 
not applicable 
0.5 % (water) 
not available 
<74 μm 

SRM 1633c 

 

Page 3 of 6 

Thermal Stability Properties: 

Autoignition Temperature (ºC): 
Thermal Decomposition (ºC): 
Initial boiling point and boiling range (ºC): 
Explosive Limits, LEL (Volume %): 
Explosive Limits, UEL (Volume %): 
Flash Point (ºC): 
Flammability (solid, gas): 

 
10.  STABILITY AND REACTIVITY 

Coal Fly Ash 
not applicable 
not applicable 
not applicable 
not applicable 
not applicable 
not applicable 
slight 

Reactivity:  Stable at normal temperatures and pressure. 

Stability: 

X 

Stable 

 

Unstable 

Possible Hazardous Reactions:  None listed. 

Conditions  to  Avoid:    Avoid  generating  dust.    Avoid  heat,  flames,  sparks  and  other  sources  of  ignition.    Avoid 
contact with incompatible materials. 

Incompatible Materials:  Oxidizing materials, bases, halogens, acids, metal salts, metals, combustible materials. 

Fire/Explosion Information:  See Section 5, “Fire Fighting Measures”. 

Hazardous Decomposition:  Thermal decomposition will produce oxides of carbon. 

Hazardous Polymerization: 
 
11.  TOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION 

  Will Occur 

X  Will Not Occur 

Route of Exposure: 

X 

Inhalation 

 

Skin 

 

Ingestion 

Symptoms  Related  to  the  Physical,  Chemical  and  Toxicological  Characteristics:    May  cause  irritation,  lung 
damage, silicosis, and cancer. 

Potential Health Effects (Acute, Chronic and Delayed): 

Inhalation:    Inhalation  of  dust  may  cause  coughing,  sneezing,  upper  respiratory  tract  irritation,  and  lung 
damage.  Chronic exposure to fine particles containing respirable quartz may result in lung  damage, silicosis, 
and cancer. 

Skin Contact:  May cause mechanical irritation. 

Eye Contact:  May cause mechanical irritation. 

Ingestion:  No data available. 

Numerical Measures of Toxicity: 

Acute Toxicity:  Not classified. 

Coal fly ash, Rat, Oral LD50:  >2000 mg/kg 
Quartz, Rat, Oral LD50:  500 mg/kg 

Skin Corrosion/Irritation:  Not classified; no data available. 

Serious Eye damage/Eye irritation:  Not classified; no data available. 

Respiratory Sensitization:  Not classified; no data available. 

Skin Sensitization:  Not classified; no data available. 

Fly  ash  containing  chromium  and  nickel  compounds  has  an  irritant  and  allergic  potential;  only  trace 
amounts of these compounds are present in this material 

Germ Cell Mutagenicity:  Not classified; no data available. 

Carcinogenicity: Category 1 

Listed as a Carcinogen/Potential Carcinogen 
Silica, crystalline quartz is listed as Group 1, carcinogenic to humans by IARC, known human carcinogen 
(respirable size) by NTP, and is not listed by OSHA as a designated carcinogen. 

X  Yes 

 No 

 

SRM 1633c 

 

 

Page 4 of 6 

Reproductive Toxicity:  Not classified. 

Coal fly ash, Rat, Intratracheal LDLo:  600 mg/kg (pregnant 14 d to 19 d) 
Quartz:  No data available. 

Specific Target Organ Toxicity (STOT), Single Exposure:  Not classified; no data available. 

Specific Target Organ Toxicity (STOT), Repeated Exposure:  Category 1 

Cumulative exposure to silica dust may result in reduced lung capacity and silicosis. 

Coal fly ash:  Invertebrate, water flea (Daphnia magna) EC50: 140 mg/L to 2000 mg/L (24 h) 

Aspiration Hazard:  Not classified. 

12.  ECOLOGICAL INFORMATION 

Ecotoxicity Data: 

Quartz:  No data available. 

Persistence and Degradability:  No data available. 

Bioaccumulative Potential:  No data available. 

Mobility in Soil:  No data available. 

Other Adverse effects:  No data available. 

13.  DISPOSAL CONSIDERATIONS 

Waste Disposal:  Dispose of waste in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations. 

14.  TRANSPORTATION INFORMATION 

U.S. DOT and IATA:  Not regulated by DOT or IATA. 

15.  REGULATORY INFORMATION 

U.S. Regulations: 

CERCLA Sections 102a/103 (40 CFR 302.4):  Not regulated. 

SARA Title III Section 302 (40 CFR 355.30):  Not regulated. 

SARA Title III Section 304 (40 CFR 355.40):  Not regulated. 

SARA Title III Section 313 (40 CFR 372.65):  Not regulated. 

OSHA Process Safety (29 CFR 1910.119):  Not regulated. 

SARA Title III Sections 311/312 Hazardous Categories (40 CFR 370.21): 

ACUTE HEALTH: 
CHRONIC HEALTH: 
FIRE: 
REACTIVE: 
PRESSURE: 

No. 
Yes. 
No. 
No. 
No. 

State Regulations: 

U.S. TSCA Inventory:  Coal fly ash and quartz are listed. 

TSCA 12(b), Export Notification:  Not listed. 

Canadian Regulations: 

WHMIS Information:  Not provided for this material. 

California  Proposition  65:    WARNING!    This  product  contains  a  chemical  (quartz)  known  to  the  state  of 
California to cause cancer. 

SRM 1633c 

 

Page 5 of 6 

16.  OTHER INFORMATION 

Issue Date:  12 March 2014 

Sources: 

ChemAdvisor, Inc., MSDS Fly Ash, 17 June 2013. 

 

ChemAdvisor, Inc., MSDS Quartz, 17 June 2013. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Key of Acronyms: 

ACGIH 

ALI 
CAS  
CEN 
CERCLA  

CFR  
CPSU 
DOT  
EC50 
EINECS 

EPCRA  

IARC  
IATA  
IDLH  
ISO 
LC50 
LD50 
LEL  
MSDS  
NFPA  
MSHA 
NIOSH  

NIST 

NRC 
NTP  
OSHA  
PEL  

RCRA  
REL  
RM 
RQ  
RTECS 

American Conference of Governmental Industrial 
Hygienists 
Annual Limit on Intake 
Chemical Abstracts Service  
European Committee for Standardization 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act  
Code of Federal Regulations  
Coal Mine Dust Personal Sample Unit 
Department of Transportation  
Effective Concentration, 50 % 
European Inventory of Existing Commercial 
Chemical Substances  
Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know 
Act  
International Agency for Research on Cancer  
International Air Transportation Agency  
Immediately Dangerous to Life and Health  
International Organization for Standardization 
Lethal Concentration, 50 %  
Lethal Dose, 50 % 
Lower Explosive Limit  
Material Safety Data Sheet  
National Fire Protection Association  
Mine Safety and Health Administration 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health   WHMIS 

SCBA  
SRM  
STEL 
STOT 
TDLo 
TLV  
TPQ  
TSCA  
TWA  
UEL  

SARA  

National Institute of Standards and Technology 

Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
National Toxicology Program 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration  
Permissible Exposure Limit 

Resource Conservation and Recovery Act  
Recommended Exposure Limit  
Reference Material 
Reportable Quantity  
Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances 

Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act  

Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus  
Standard Reference Material  
Short Term Exposure Limit  
Specific Target Organ Toxicity  
Toxic Dose Low 
Threshold Limit Value  
Threshold Planning Quantity  
Toxic Substances Control Act  
Time Weighted Average  
Upper Explosive Limit  
Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:   Physical  and  chemical  data  contained  in  this  SDS  are  provided  only  for  use  in  assessing  the 
hazardous nature of the  material.   The SDS was prepared carefully, using current references; however, NIST does 
not certify the data in the SDS.    The certified values for this material are given in the NIST Certificate of Analysis. 

Users  of  this  SRM  should  ensure  that  the  SDS  in  their  possession  is  current.    This  can  be  accomplished  by 
contacting the SRM Program: telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srmmsds@nist.gov; or via the 
Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 1633c 

 

Page 6 of 6 

