Date of Issue: 
27 June 2017 

 
SAFETY DATA SHEET 

 

1.  SUBSTANCE AND SOURCE IDENTIFICATION  

Product Identifier 
SRM Number: 
SRM Name: 
Other Means of Identification:  Not applicable. 

187f 
Sodium Tetraborate Decahydrate (Borax) pH Standard 

Recommended Use of This Material and Restrictions of Use 

This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended for use in preparing solutions for calibrating electrodes for 
pH measuring systems.  SRM 187f  Sodium Tetraborate Decahydrate (Na2B4O7•10 H2O) was prepared to ensure 
high  purity  and  uniformity.    However,  this  SRM  is  certified  ONLY  as  a  pH  standard,  pH(S),  not  as  a  pure 
substance.  A unit of SRM 187f consists of 30 g of sodium tetraborate decahydrate. 

Company Information 

National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Standard Reference Materials Program 
100 Bureau Drive, Stop 2300 
Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899-2300 
 
Telephone:  301-975-2200 
FAX:  301-948-3730 
E-mail:  SRMMSDS@nist.gov 
Website:  http://www.nist.gov/srm 

2.  HAZARDS IDENTIFICATION 

 
 
 
 
 
Emergency Telephone ChemTrec: 
  1-800-424-9300 
 +1-703-527-3887 
 

(North America) 
(International) 

Classification  

Physical Hazard: 
Health Hazard: 
 
 
Label Elements 
Symbol: 

Not classified. 
Serious Eye Damage/Eye Irritation – Category 2A 
Reproductive Toxicity – Category 1B 
 

Signal Word:  DANGER 

 

Hazard Statement(s): 
H319 
H360 

Causes serious eye irritation 
May damage fertility or the unborn child. 

Precautionary Statement(s): 
P201 
P202 
P264 
P280 
P305+P351+P338 

P308 + P313 
P337 + P313 
P405 
P501 

Obtain special instructions before use. 
Do not handle until all safety precautions have been read and understood. 
Wash hands thoroughly after handling. 
Wear protective gloves, protective clothing and eye protection. 
If in eyes: Rinse cautiously with water for several minutes. Remove contact lenses, if 
present and easy to do. Continue rinsing 
If exposed or concerned:  Get medical attention. 
If eye irritation persists: get medical attention. 
Store locked up. 
Dispose of contents and container according to local regulations. 

Hazards Not Otherwise Classified:  Not applicable. 

SRM 187f 

 

Page 1 of 6 

Ingredients(s) with Unknown Acute Toxicity:  Not applicable. 

3.  COMPOSITION AND INFORMATION ON HAZARDOUS INGREDIENTS 

Substance:  Sodium Tetraborate Decahydrate 

Other Designations:  Borax, sodium pyroborate decahydrate, sodium biborate decahydrate, boricin. 

Hazardous Component(s) 

CAS Number 

EC Number 
(EINECS) 

Nominal Mass Concentration  
(%) 

Sodium Tetraborate Decahydrate 

1303-96-4 

215-540-4 

100 

 

4.  FIRST AID MEASURES 

Description of First Aid Measures:  

Inhalation:  If adverse effects occur, remove to uncontaminated area.  If not breathing, give artificial respiration 
or oxygen by qualified personnel.  Seek immediate medical attention. 

Skin Contact:  Wash skin with soap and water for at least 15 minutes.  If necessary, seek medical attention. 

Eye Contact:  Flush eyes with water for at least 15 minutes.  If necessary, seek medical attention. 

Ingestion:  If a large amount is swallowed, seek medical attention. 

Most Important Symptoms/Effects, Acute and Delayed:  Gastrointestinal disorders and reproductive effects. 

Indication of any immediate medical attention and special treatment needed, if necessary:  If any of the above 
symptoms are present, seek medical attention if needed. 

5.  FIRE FIGHTING MEASURES 

Fire  and  Explosion  Hazards:    Negligible  fire  hazard.    See  Section 9,  “Physical  and  Chemical  Properties”  for 
flammability properties. 

Extinguishing Media: 
 
 

Suitable:  Use extinguishing media appropriate for the surrounding area. 
Unsuitable:  None listed. 

Specific Hazards Arising from the Chemical:  None listed. 

Special Protective Equipment and Precautions for Fire-Fighters:  Avoid inhalation of material or combustion 
byproducts.  Move container from fire area if it can be done without risk.  Stay upwind and keep out of low areas.  
Wear full protective clothing and NIOSH approved self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA). 

NFPA Ratings (0 = Minimal; 1 = Slight; 2 = Moderate; 3 = Serious; 4 = Severe)  

 

Health = 1 

Fire = 0 

Reactivity = 0 

6.  ACCIDENTAL RELEASE MEASURES 

Personal Precautions, Protective Equipment and Emergency Procedures:  Keep unnecessary personnel away.  
Use suitable protective equipment; see Section 8, “Exposure Controls and Personal Protection”. 

Methods and Materials for Containment and Clean up:  Notify safety personnel of spills.  Collect spilled material 
in appropriate container for disposal.  Isolate hazard area and deny entry.  Keep out of water supplies and sewers.  

7.  HANDLING AND STORAGE 

Safe  Handling  Precautions:    Use  methods  to  minimize  dust.    See  Section 8,  “Exposure  Controls  and  Personal 
Protection”. 

Storage:  Store and handling in accordance with all current regulations and standards. 

8.  EXPOSURE CONTROLS AND PERSONAL PROTECTION 

Exposure Limits: 

OSHA (PEL): 
NIOSH (REL): 

 Not established. 
5 mg/m3 (TWA)  

SRM 187f 

 

Page 2 of 6 

ACGIH (REL): 

2 mg/m3 (TWA inhalable fraction) 

Engineering Controls:   Provide  local  exhaust  or  process  enclosure  ventilation  system.  Ensure  compliance  with 
applicable exposure limits. 

Personal  Protection:    In  accordance  with  OSHA 29  CFR 1910.132,  subpart  I,  wear  appropriate  Personal 
Protective Equipment (PPE) to minimize exposure to this material. 

Respiratory Protection:    If workplace conditions warrant a respirator, a respiratory protection program that 
meets  OSHA 29CFR 1910.134  must  be  followed.    Refer  to  NIOSH  42 CFR 84  for  applicable  certified 
respirators. 

Eye/Face Protection:  Wear splash resistant safety goggles with a face shield.  An eyewash station should be 
readily available near areas of use. 

Skin and Body Protection:  Personal protective equipment for the body should be selected based on the task 
being performed and the risks involved and should be approved by a specialist before handling this product.  
Chemical-resistant gloves should be worn at all times when handling chemicals. 

9.  PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES 

 

 

Descriptive Properties: 
Appearance  
(physical state, color, etc.): 
Molecular Formula: 
Molar Mass (g/mol): 
Odor: 
Odor threshold: 
pH: 
Evaporation rate: 
Melting point/freezing point (ºC): 
Relative Density (g/L): 
Vapor Pressure (mmHg): 
Vapor Density (air = 1): 
Viscosity (cP): 
Solubility(ies): 

Sodium Tetraborate Decahydrate  

efflorescent white solid 

Na2B4O7·10(H2O)  
381.37 
odorless 
not available 
9.5 at 20 ºC (3% aqueous) 
not available 
62.2-75 (144-167 ºF) 
1.73 (relative to water) 
negligible at 20 ºC   
not applicable 
not applicable 
5.8-6.25 % water, glycerol; insoluble 
in acids 
not available 

Partition coefficient (n-octanol/water): 

Particle Size: 

Thermal Stability Properties: 

Autoignition Temperature (ºC): 

Thermal Decomposition (ºC): 

Initial boiling point and boiling range (ºC): 

Explosive Limits, LEL (Volume %): 

Explosive Limits, UEL (Volume %): 

Flash Point (ºC): 

Flammability (solid, gas): 

not available 
 

not available 

not available 

320 (608 ºF) 

not available 

not available 

not available 

not available 

10.  STABILITY AND REACTIVITY 

Reactivity:  Stable at normal temperatures and pressure. 

Stability: 

X 

Stable 

 

Unstable 

Possible Hazardous Reactions:  No data available. 

Conditions to Avoid:  Generating dust. 

Incompatible Materials:  metals, oxidizing materials. 

SRM 187f 

 

Page 3 of 6 

Fire/Explosion Information:  See Section 5, “Fire Fighting Measures”. 

Hazardous Decomposition:  Oxides of boron, oxides of sodium. 

  Will Occur 

X  Will Not Occur 

Hazardous Polymerization: 
 

11.  TOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION 

 

Route of Exposure: 

 

Inhalation 

 

Skin 

X 

Ingestion 

Symptoms Related to the Physical, Chemical and Toxicological Characteristics:  Fatigue, weakness, anorexia, 
anemia, jaundice, encephalopathy. 

Potential Health Effects (Acute, Chronic and Delayed): 

Inhalation:  May cause irritation of the mucous membranes with coughing, dryness and sore throat and may be 
absorbed causing systemic effects as detailed in acute ingestion.  Repeated or prolonged absorption of borates 
may cause bronchitis, laryngitis, and other effects as detailed in chronic ingestion. 

Skin  Contact:    May  cause  irritation.    Skin  absorption  may  occur  through  intact  or  damaged  skin  causing  as 
detailed in acute ingestion. 

Eye  Contact:    May  cause  irritation  with  redness,  pain,  blurred  vision  and  possible  corneal  injury.    Borax 
(CAS No. 1303-96-4) was evaluated for the potential to induce eye irritation in New Zealand White rabbits.  Six 
young adult rabbits were administered 0.1 g of the test article into 1 eye by gently pulling the lower lid away from 
the eyeball to form a cup into which the material was instilled.  The lids were then held together for one second.  
The untreated eye in each animal served as control.  The eyes were examined at 1, 24, 48, and 72 hours post-
treatment and scored against the Draize Scale for Ocular Lesions.  Mean irritation scores ranged from 34.5 at the 
24 hours examination to 20.7 at the 72 hours examination.  One animal exhibited slow and incomplete recovery 
by 21 days post-treatment.  Based on this, the test material was considered severely irritating.  

Ingestion:  Borates may cause delayed symptoms including malaise, nausea, severe epigastric pain, hemorrhagic 
gastroenteritis with bloody vomitus and diarrhea, weakness, lethargy, fever and headache.  Erythroderma may 
occur,  followed  by  desquamation,  excoriation,  blistering  and  bullae,  typically  located  on  the  palms,  soles, 
buttocks and scrotum and later becoming generalized over the body.  Repeated ingestion may result in anorexia, 
weight  loss,  mild  gastrointestinal  irritation  with  disturbed  digestion,  nausea,  vomiting,  mild  diarrhea  and 
gastroenteritis.    Erythematous  skin  rashes,  dry  skin  and  mucous  membranes  with  cracked  lips,  red  tongue, 
conjunctivitis, anemia, irritability, patchy alopecia, periorbital edema, kidney injury and convulsions may also 
occur.  Repeated doses may have a cumulative effect.  One percent borax in the diet of dogs and rats in a 2-year 
feeding study caused growth suppression, decreased food utilization efficiency, degeneration of gonads, and skin 
desquamation  on  paws  and  tails.  Testicular  atrophy  also  occurred  at  this  level  in  both  dogs  and  rats.    Other 
reproductive effects have been reported in animals. 

Numerical Measures of Toxicity:  

Acute Toxicity:  Not classified. 
Rat Oral LD50: 2660 mg/kg 

Skin Corrosion/Irritation:  Not classified; no data available. 

Serious Eye damage/ Eye irritation:  Category 2. 

Respiratory Sensitization:  Not classified; no data available. 

Skin Sensitization:  Not classified; no data available. 

Germ Cell Mutagenicity:  Not classified; no data available. 

Carcinogenicity:  Not classified 

Listed as a Carcinogen/Potential Carcinogen 
Borax is not listed by NTP, IARC or OSHA. 

 

Yes 

 

X  No 

Reproductive Toxicity:  Category 1B; animal studies show changes in testes. 

Specific Target Organ Toxicity, Single Exposure:  Not classified; no data available. 

Specific Target Organ Toxicity, Repeated Exposure:  Not classified; no data available. 

Aspiration Hazard:  Not applicable. 

SRM 187f 

 

Page 4 of 6 

12.  ECOLOGICAL INFORMATION 

Ecotoxicity Data:  Data related to disodium tetraborate. 

Fish: Common dab (Limanda limanda) LC50:  340 mg/L (96 h). 

Algae: Pseudokirchneriella subcapitata EC50:  2.6-21.8 mg/L (96 h, static). 

Invertebrate: Water flea (Daphnia magna) LC50:  1085-1402 mg/L (48 h). 

Persistence and Degradability:  No data available. 

Bioaccumulative Potential:  No evidence if bioacculation (related to disodium tetraborate). 

Mobility in Soil:  No data available. 

Other Adverse effects:  No data available. 

13.  DISPOSAL CONSIDERATIONS 

Waste Disposal:  Dispose of waste in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations. 

14.  TRANSPORTATION INFORMATION 

U.S. DOT and IATA:  Not regulated by DOT or IATA. 

15.  REGULATORY INFORMATION 

U.S. Regulations: 

CERCLA Sections 102a/103 (40 CFR 302.4):  Not regulated. 

SARA Title III Section 302 (40 CFR 355.30):  Not regulated. 

SARA Title III Section 304 (40 CFR 355.40):  Not regulated. 

SARA Title III Section 313 (40 CFR 372.65):  Not regulated. 

OSHA Process Safety (29 CFR 1910.119):  Not regulated. 

SARA Title III Sections 311/312 Hazardous Categories (40 CFR 370.21): 

ACUTE HEALTH: 
CHRONIC HEALTH: 
FIRE: 
REACTIVE: 
PRESSURE: 

Yes. 
Yes. 
No. 
No. 
No. 

State Regulations: 

California Proposition 65:  Not listed. 

U.S. TSCA Inventory:  Listed. 

TSCA 12(b), Export Notification:  Not listed. 

Canadian Regulations: 

WHMIS Information:  Not provided for this material. 

 

 

SRM 187f 

 

Page 5 of 6 

 

16.  OTHER INFORMATION 

Issue Date:  27 June 2017 

Sources: 

ChemAdvisor, Inc., SDS Sodium Tetraborate Decahydrate, 22 December 2016. 

CDC;  NIOSH;  NIOSH  Pocket  Guide  to  Chemical  Hazards;  Department  of  Health  and  Human 
Services (DHHS), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), National Institute for Safety and 
Health; 
at  
1303-96-4, 
http://www.cdc.gov/niosh-rtecs/VZ22B6B8.html (accessed June 2017). 

available 

RTECS 

2009; 

May 

CAS 

#: 

U.S. National Library of Medicine; Hazardous Substances Data Bank (HSDB); Borax; available at 
https://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/newtoxnet/hsdb.htm (accessed June 2017). 

Vendor SDS, Sodium Tetraborate, Decahydrate Reagent (ACS), 20 March 2017. 

Key of Acronyms: 

ACGIH 

ALI 
CAS  
CERCLA  

CFR  
DOT  
EC50 
ECHA 
EPCRA  

IARC  
IATA  
IDLH  
LC50 
LD50 
LEL  
MSDS  
NFPA  
NIOSH  
NIST 

NRC 

NTP  
OSHA  
PEL  

American Conference of Governmental Industrial 
Hygienists 
Annual Limit on Intake 
Chemical Abstracts Service  
Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act  
Code of Federal Regulations  
Department of Transportation  
Effective Concentration, 50 % 
European Chemicals Agency  
Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know 
Act  
SARA  
International Agency for Research on Cancer  
SCBA  
International Air Transport Association  
SRM  
Immediately Dangerous to Life and Health  
STEL  
Lethal Concentration, 50 %  
TLV  
Lethal Dose, 50 % 
TPQ  
Lower Explosive Limit  
TSCA  
Material Safety Data Sheet  
National Fire Protection Association  
TWA  
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health   UEL  
National Institute of Standards and Technology 

RCRA  
REL  
RM 
RQ  
RTECS 

WHMIS 

Nuclear Regulatory Commission 

National Toxicology Program 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration  
Permissible Exposure Limit 

Resource Conservation and Recovery Act  
Recommended Exposure Limit  
Reference Material 
Reportable Quantity  
Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances 

Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act  
Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus  
Standard Reference Material  
Short Term Exposure Limit 
Threshold Limit Value  
Threshold Planning Quantity  
Toxic Substances Control Act  
Time Weighted Average  
Upper Explosive Limit  
Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Disclaimer:   Physical  and  chemical  data  contained  in  this  SDS  are  provided  only  for  use  in  assessing  the 
hazardous nature of the material.  The SDS was prepared carefully, using current references; however, NIST does not 
certify the data in the SDS.    The certified values for this material are given in the NIST Certificate of Analysis. 

Users of this SRM should ensure that the SDS in their possession is current. This can be accomplished by contacting 
the SRM Program: telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srminfo@nist.gov; or via the Internet at 
http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 187f 

 

Page 6 of 6 

