 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE:  07 January 2014 
 
Product Identifier 

SRM Number:  2232 
SRM Name: 

Indium DSC Calibration Standard (Temperature and Enthalpy of Fusion) 

Under the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health  Administration (OSHA) 29 CFR 1910.1200, 
this  Standard  Reference  Material (SRM)  is  NOT  classified  as  a  physical  hazard  or  a  health  hazard,  a  simple 
asphyxiant, combustible dust, pyrophoric gas, or hazard not otherwise classified.  There are no hazard pictograms, 
hazard statements or signal word associated with it.  Safety Data Sheet information is not required.  This document 
may be used in conjunction with your hazard communication program. 
 
This material is formed to a specific shape or design during manufacture which under normal conditions of use does 
not release more than very small quantities, e.g., minute or trace amounts of a hazardous chemical (as determined 
under paragraph (d) of 1910.1200), and does not pose a physical hazard or health risk to employees. 
 
Description:    This  SRM  is  intended  for  use  in  the  temperature  and  enthalpy  of  fusion  calibrations  of  differential 
thermal  analyzers (DTA),  differential  scanning  calorimeters (DSC),  and  similar  instruments.    A  unit  of  SRM 2232 
consists of a 1 g piece of indium metal sealed in an argon atmosphere in a mylar bag. 
 
Disposal:  SRM 2232 should be disposed of in accordance with local, state, and federal regulations. 
 
Transport  Information:    This  material  is  not  regulated  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Transportation (DOT)  and/or 
International Air Transportation Association (IATA). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:  This document was prepared carefully, using current references.  Users of this SRM should ensure that 
this  document  and  the  corresponding  Certificate  of  Analysis  in  their  possession  are  current.    This  can  be 
accomplished  by  contacting  the  SRM  Program:    telephone  (301)  975-2200;  fax  (301)  948-3730;  e-mail 
srmmsds@nist.gov; or via the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 2232 

 

Page 1 of 1 

