Date of Issue: 
22 July 2014 

 
SAFETY DATA SHEET 

 

1.  SUBSTANCE AND SOURCE IDENTIFICATION  

Product Identifier 
RM Number: 
RM Name: 
Other Means of Identification:  Not applicable. 

2483 
Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes (Raw Soot)   

Recommended Use of This Material and Restrictions of Use 

This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended primarily for use in evaluating chemical and instrumental 
methods of analysis of carbon nanotubes.  A unit of SRM 2483 consists of a bottle containing approximately 
250 mg of nanotube soot.  

Emergency Telephone ChemTrec: 

1-800-424-9300
+1-703-527-3887

(North America) 
(International) 

Company Information 

National Institute of Standards and Technology
Standard Reference Materials Program
100 Bureau Drive, Stop 2300 
Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899-2300 
 
Telephone:  301-975-2200 
FAX:  301-948-3730 
E-mail:  SRMMSDS@nist.gov 
Website:  http://www.nist.gov/srm 

2.  HAZARDS IDENTIFICATION 

Classification  

Not classified. 
Respiratory Sensitization – Category 1 
Skin Sensitization – Category 1 
Carcinogenicity – Category 2 
 

Physical Hazard: 
Health Hazard: 
 
 
 
OSHA Defined Hazard:  Combustible Dust 
 
Label Elements 
Symbol: 

 

Signal Word:  DANGER 

Hazard Statement(s): 
H334 
H317 
H351 
------ 

May cause allergy or asthma symptoms or breathing difficulties if inhaled. 
May cause an allergic skin reaction. 
Suspected of causing cancer. 
May form combustible dust concentrations in air. 

Precautionary Statement(s): 
P201 
P202 
P261 
P272 
P280 
P284 
P304 + P340 
P342 + P311 
 

Obtain special instructions before use. 
Do not handle until all safety precautions have been read and understood. 
Avoid breathing dust. 
Contaminated work clothing must not be allowed out of the workplace. 
Wear protective gloves, protective clothing, and eye protection. 
Wear respiratory protection. 
If inhaled: If breathing is difficult, remove person to fresh air and keep comfortable for breathing. 
If experiencing respiratory symptoms: Call a doctor. 

SRM 2483 

 

Page 1 of 7 

P302 + P352 
P333 + P313 
P363 
 
P308 + P313 
P405 
P501 

If on skin: Wash with plenty of water. 
If skin irritation or rash occurs: Get medical attention. 
Wash contaminated clothing before reuse. 

If exposed or concerned:  Get medical attention. 
Store locked up. 
Dispose of contents and container according to local regulations. 

Hazards Not Otherwise Classified:  Not applicable. 

Ingredients(s) with Unknown Acute Toxicity:  Not applicable. 

3.  COMPOSITION AND INFORMATION ON HAZARDOUS INGREDIENTS 

Substance:  Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes 

Other Designations:  Nanotubes, carbon nanotubes (CNT); tubular fullerenes. 

Components are listed in compliance with OSHA’s 29 CFR 1910.1200; for the actual values see the NIST Certificate 
of Analysis. 

Hazardous Component(s) 

CAS Number 

Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes(a) 
Cobalt 

308068-56-6 
  7440-48-4 

EC Number 
(EINECS) 

not available 
231-158-0 

Nominal Mass Concentration 
(%) 

<99 
1 

(a) CAS number assigned to carbon nanotubes, tubular fullerenes, single wall nanotubes, tubulenes, and single-walled nanotubes. 

4.  FIRST AID MEASURES 

Description of First Aid Measures:  

Inhalation:  If adverse effects occur, remove to uncontaminated area.  If not breathing, give artificial respiration 
or oxygen by qualified personnel.  Seek immediate medical attention. 

Skin Contact:  Wash skin with soap and water for at least 15 minutes.  If necessary, seek medical attention. 

Eye Contact:  Flush eyes with water for at least 15 minutes.  If necessary, seek medical attention. 

Ingestion:  Do not induce vomiting; if vomiting occurs spontaneously, keep head below hips to prevent aspiration.  
Obtain medical attention. 

Most Important Symptoms/Effects, Acute and Delayed:  Coughing, respiratory effects (pulmonary inflammation). 

Indication of any immediate medical attention and special treatment needed, if necessary:  If any of the above 
symptoms are present or suspected, seek medical attention if needed. 

5.  FIRE FIGHTING MEASURES 

Fire and Explosion Hazards:  Slight fire hazard.  Dust may form explosive mixtures with air.  See Section 9, “Physical 
and Chemical Properties” for flammability properties. 

Extinguishing Media: 
 
 

Suitable:  Use extinguishing media appropriate for the surrounding area. 
Unsuitable:  High volume water jet. 

Specific Hazards Arising from the Chemical:  None listed. 

Special Protective Equipment and Precautions for Fire-Fighters:  Avoid inhalation of material or combustion 
byproducts.  Wear full protective clothing and NIOSH approved self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA). 

NFPA Ratings (0 = Minimal; 1 = Slight; 2 = Moderate; 3 = Serious; 4 = Severe)  

Health = 2 

Fire = 1 

Reactivity = 0 

 

 

 

SRM 2483 

 

Page 2 of 7 

6.  ACCIDENTAL RELEASE MEASURES 

Personal Precautions, Protective Equipment and Emergency Procedures:  Any accumulated material on surfaces 
should be removed and properly disposed of.  Keep unnecessary personnel away.  Use suitable protective equipment; 
see Section 8, “Exposure Controls and Personal Protection”. 

Methods and Materials for Containment and Clean up:  Notify safety personnel of spills.  Dry sweeping or air 
hoses should not be used to clean work areas.  Use of HEPA-filtered vacuum cleaners is recommended.  Collect 
spilled  material  in  appropriate  container  for  disposal.    Isolate  hazard  area  and  deny  entry.    Prevent  discharge  to 
natural waters, sewers and biological waste water treatment plants. 

7.  HANDLING AND STORAGE 

Safe Handling Precautions:  Minimize dust generation and accumulation on surfaces.  Routine housekeeping should 
be instituted to ensure that dust does not accumulate on surfaces.  Avoid generating dust.  See Section 8, “Exposure 
Controls and Personal Protection”. 

Storage:  Store and handling in accordance with all current regulations and standards. 

8.  EXPOSURE CONTROLS AND PERSONAL PROTECTION 

Exposure Limits: 

Component:  Carbon nanotubes 

NIOSH (REL):   
OSHA (PEL):   
Component:  Cobalt 
NIOSH (REL):   
 
ACGIH (TLV):   
OSHA (PEL):   

1 µg/m3 (respirable nanotubes-elemental carbon, TWA) 
No occupational limits established. 

0.05  mg/m3 (dust and fume, TWA) 
20  mg/m3 (dust and fume, IDLH) 
0.02  mg/m3 [TWA as Co (related to Cobalt inorganic compounds] 
0.1   mg/m3 (dust and fume, TWA) 

 

Engineering Controls:   Provide  local  exhaust  or  process  enclosure  ventilation  system.  Ensure  compliance  with 
applicable exposure limits. 

Personal Protection:  In accordance with OSHA 29 CFR 1910.132, subpart I, wear appropriate Personal Protective 
Equipment (PPE) to minimize exposure to this material. 

Respiratory Protection:    At a minimum wear a National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health NIOSH 
certified air-purifying tight-fitting full-face respirator with N-100 cartridge or equivalent in accordance with 
respiratory protection requirements specified in OSHA 29 CFR 1910.134 and NIOSH 42 CFR 84 whenever 
exposure to the product by inhalation is possible. 

Eye/Face Protection:  Wear chemical goggles or safety glasses at all times unless the NIOSH full-face respirator 
discussed  immediately  above  is  being  worn.    The  respirator’s  mask  provides  appropriate  eye.    An  eyewash 
station should be readily available near areas of use. 

Skin and Body Protection:  Personal protective equipment for the body should be selected based on the task 
being performed and the risks involved and should be approved by a specialist before handling this product.   

Protecting gloves:  

Suitable materials for safety gloves/ EN 374-3: Nitrile rubber (NBR; > 0.35 mm).   

Unsuitable material: Do not wear neoprene gloves, as neoprene absorbs nanoparticles.  Each such 
item of personal protective equipment must be selected and used in accordance with OSHA dermal 
protection requirements at 29 CFR 1910.132, 1910.133 and 1910.138. 

 

 

SRM 2483 

 

Page 3 of 7 

 

 

9.  PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES

Descriptive Properties: 

Nanotubes 

Appearance (physical state, color, etc.): 
Molecular Formula: 
Molar Mass (g/mol): 
Odor: 
Odor threshold: 
pH: 
Evaporation rate: 
Melting point/freezing point (ºC): 
Specific gravity (water = 1): 
Vapor Pressure (mmHg): 
Vapor Density (air = 1): 
Viscosity (cP): 
Solubility(ies): 
Partition coefficient (n-octanol/water): 

black powder 
not applicable 
not applicable 
odorless 
not available 
not available 
not available 
3652-3697  (6606-6687 ºF) 
0.114 
not available 
not available 
not available 
insoluble in water 
not available 

Particle Size: 

nanometer range not available 

Thermal Stability Properties: 

Autoignition Temperature (ºC): 

Thermal Decomposition (ºC): 

Initial boiling point and boiling range (ºC): 

Explosive Limits, LEL (Volume %): 

Explosive Limits, UEL (Volume %): 

Flash Point (ºC): 

Flammability (solid, gas): 

Nanotubes 
not applicable 

not applicable 

not applicable 

not available  

not available 

not applicable 

not available 

10.  STABILITY AND REACTIVITY 

Reactivity:  Stable at normal temperatures and pressure. 

Stability: 

X 

Stable 

 

Unstable 

Possible Hazardous Reactions:  No data available. 

Conditions to Avoid:  Avoid generating dust.  Keep out of water supplies and sewers.   

Incompatible Materials:  Strong oxidizing agents, acids, halogens, interhalogens, and alkali metals. 

Fire/Explosion Information:  See Section 5, “Fire Fighting Measures”. 

Hazardous Decomposition:  Oxides of carbon, oxides of metallic impurities. 

  Will Occur 

X  Will Not Occur 

Hazardous Polymerization: 
 
 

 

SRM 2483 

 

Page 4 of 7 

11.  TOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION 

 

Route of Exposure: 

X 

Inhalation 

X 

Skin 

 

Ingestion 

Symptoms Related to the Physical, Chemical and Toxicological Characteristics:  Coughing, respiratory effects 
(pulmonary inflammation). 

Potential Health Effects (Acute, Chronic and Delayed): 

Inhalation:    The  National  Institute  for  Occupational  Safety  and  Health  (NIOSH)  systematically  reviewed 
54 laboratory animal studies, many of which indicated that carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and carbon nanofibers could 
cause adverse pulmonary effects including inflammation, granulomas, and pulmonary fibrosis.  There are well 
established correlations between results of animal studies and adverse effects in workers exposed to particulates 
and other air contaminants.  In addition, NIOSH considers these animal study findings to be relevant to human 
health risks because similar lung effects have been observed in workers exposed to respirable particulates of other 
materials in dusty jobs.  Moreover, in animal studies where CNTs were compared with other known fibrogenic 
materials  (e.g.,  silica,  asbestos,  ultrafine  carbon black),  the  CNTs were of  similar  or  greater potency,  and  the 
effects,  including  fibrosis,  developed  soon  after  exposure  and  persisted.    Inhalation  of  cobalt  can  result  in 
sensitization.  Bronchial asthma has been described in workers exposed to various forms of cobalt.  Interstitial 
lung disease caused by metallic cobalt particles is an occupational lung disease generally referred as hard metal 
lung disease. 

Skin Contact:  Exposure to materials containing cobalt may cause irritation, allergic reactions, and skin disorders.  
Dust may cause mechanical irritation.  

Eye Contact:  No toxicity data available; dust may cause mechanical irritation. 

Ingestion:  No information available. 

Numerical Measures of Toxicity:  

Acute Toxicity:  No data available. 

Skin Corrosion/Irritation:  Not classified; no data available. 

Serious Eye damage/Eye irritation:  Not classified; no data available. 

Respiratory Sensitization:  Category 1. 

This SRM contains >0.1 % of cobalt and it is classified as Category 1. 

Skin Sensitization:  Category 1. 

This SRM contains >0.1 % of cobalt and it is classified as Category 1. 

Germ Cell Mutagenicity:  Not classified. 

Not mutagenic (Ames test). 

Carcinogenicity:  Category 2 

Listed as a Carcinogen/Potential Carcinogen
CNTs are not listed by NTP, IARC or OSHA as carcinogen/potential carcinogen.  This material is classified 
as Category 2 suspected of being carcinogenic based on animal studies, see “Potential Health Effects” for 
inhalation.  

X  No 

Yes 

 

 

Reproductive Toxicity:  Not classified; no data available. 

Specific Target Organ Toxicity, Single Exposure:  Not classified; no data available. 

Specific Target Organ Toxicity, Repeated Exposure:  No data available. 

Aspiration Hazard:  Not applicable. 

 

 

SRM 2483 

 

Page 5 of 7 

Waste Disposal:   Dispose of waste in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations.  Prevent 
discharge to natural waters, sewers and biological waste water treatment plants. 

Cobalt:  Zebrafish (Brachydanio rerio) LC50:  > 100 mg/L (96 h; static) 

Persistence and Degradability:  No biodegradation expected. 

 

12.  ECOLOGICAL INFORMATION 

Ecotoxicity Data:   

Bioaccumulative Potential:  No data available. 

Mobility in Soil:  No data available. 

Other Adverse effects:  No data available. 

13.  DISPOSAL CONSIDERATIONS 

14.  TRANSPORTATION INFORMATION 

U.S. DOT and IATA:  Not regulated by DOT or IATA. 

15.  REGULATORY INFORMATION 

U.S. Regulations: 

CERCLA Sections 102a/103 (40 CFR 302.4):  This SRM is not regulated. 

SARA Title III Section 302 (40 CFR 355.30):  This SRM is not regulated. 

SARA Title III Section 304 (40 CFR 355.40):  This SRM is not regulated. 

SARA Title III Section 313 (40 CFR 372.65):  This SRM is not regulated. 

OSHA Process Safety (29 CFR 1910.119):  This SRM is not regulated. 

SARA Title III Sections 311/312 Hazardous Categories (40 CFR 370.21): 

ACUTE HEALTH: 
CHRONIC HEALTH: 
FIRE: 
REACTIVE: 
PRESSURE: 

No.  
Yes. 
No. 
No. 
No. 

State Regulations: 

California Proposition 65:  Not listed 

U.S. TSCA Inventory:  Synthetic graphite and cobalt are listed. 

TSCA 12(b), Export Notification:  Not listed. 

Canadian Regulations: 

WHMIS Information:  Not provided for this material. 

 

 

SRM 2483 

 

Page 6 of 7 

16.  OTHER INFORMATION 

Issue Date:  22 July 2014 

 

 

Sources: 

South  West  NanoTechnologies,  MSDS  SWeNT®  Freeze  Dried  Powder  Single-Wall  Carbon 
Nanotubes, 09 January 2014. 

CDC; NIOSH; Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention  (CDC),  National  Institute  for  Safety  and  Health;    Current  Intelligence  Bulletin  65, 
Occupational  Exposure  to  Carbon  Nanotubes  and  Nanofibers;  NIOSH  161-A;  available  at 
http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2013-145/  (accessed Jul 2014). 

CDC; NIOSH; Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention  (CDC),  National  Institute  for  Safety  and  Health;  Approaches  to  Safe  Nanotechnology: 
Managing  the  Health  and  Safety  Concerns  Associated  with  Engineered  Nanomaterials;  NIOSH 
Publication 2009-128; available at http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2009-125/ (accessed Jul 2014). 

ChemADVISOR, Inc., SDS Synthetic Graphite, 21 March 2014. 

ChemADVISOR, Inc., SDS Cobalt, 21 March 2014. 

National Library of Medicine; Toxicology Data Network; Hazardous Substance Databank, Cobalt CAS 
# 7440-48-4; available at http://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/newtoxnet/hsdb.htm (accessed Jul 2014). 

 

Key of Acronyms: 

ACGIH 

ALI 
CAS  
CERCLA  

CFR  
DOT  
EC50 
EC10 
EINECS 

EPCRA  

IARC  
IATA  
IDLH  
LC50 
LD50 
LEL  
MSDS  
LOAEC 
NFPA  
NIOSH  
NIST 
 

NOEC 

Response, 

Environmental 

NRC
NTP 
OSHA 

PEL 
PNOR
RCRA 
REL  
RM

American  Conference  of  Governmental  Industrial 
Hygienists 
Annual Limit on Intake 
Chemical Abstracts Service  
Comprehensive 
Compensation, and Liability Act  
Code of Federal Regulations  
Department of Transportation  
Effective Concentration, 50 % 
Effective Concentration, 10 % 
European Inventory of Existing Commercial Chemical 
Substances  
Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know 
Act  
International Agency for Research on Cancer 
RTECS
International Air Transportation Agency 
SARA 
Immediately Dangerous to Life and Health 
SCBA 
Lethal Concentration, 50 %  
SRM 
Lethal Dose, 50 % 
STEL 
Lower Explosive Limit  
TLV 
Material Safety Data Sheet  
TPQ 
Lowest Observable Adverse Effect Concentration 
TSCA  
TWA 
National Fire Protection Association 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health  UEL 
National Institute of Standards and Technology
 

RQ 

WHMIS
 

No Observed Effect Concentration 

Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
National Toxicology Program 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration 

Permissible Exposure Limit 
Particulates Not Otherwise Regulated  
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
Recommended Exposure Limit  
Reference Material

Reportable Quantity 

Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances
Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act 
Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus  
Standard Reference Material  
Short Term Exposure Limit 
Threshold Limit Value  
Threshold Planning Quantity  
Toxic Substances Control Act  
Time Weighted Average  
Upper Explosive Limit  
Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Disclaimer:   Physical  and  chemical  data  contained  in  this  SDS  are  provided  only  for  use  in  assessing  the 
hazardous nature of the material.  The SDS was prepared carefully, using current references; however, NIST does not 
certify the data in the SDS.    The certified values for this material are given in the NIST Certificate of Analysis. 

Users of this SRM should ensure that the SDS in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished by contacting 
the SRM Program: telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srmmsds@nist.gov; or via the Internet at 
http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 2483 

 

Page 7 of 7 

