Date of Issue: 
19 July 2017 

 
SAFETY DATA SHEET 

 

1.  SUBSTANCE AND SOURCE IDENTIFICATION  

Product Identifier 
SRM Number: 
SRM Name: 
Other Means of Identification:  Not applicable. 

2625a 
Carbon Dioxide in Nitrogen (Nominal Amount-of-Substance Fraction 3.5 % mol/mol) 

Recommended Use of This Material and Restrictions of Use 

This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is a primary gas mixture of carbon dioxide in nitrogen supplied in a 
DOT 3AL specification aluminum (6061 alloy) cylinder with a water volume of 6 L.  This SRM is intended for 
the calibration of instruments used for carbon dioxide determinations and for other applications.  Mixtures are 
shipped with a nominal pressure exceeding 12.4 MPa (1800 psig), which provides the user with 0.73 m3 (25.8 ft3) 
of useable mixture.  The cylinder is the property of the purchaser and is equipped with a CGA-580 brass valve, 
which is the recommended outlet for this carbon dioxide mixture. 

Company Information 

National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Standard Reference Materials Program 
100 Bureau Drive, Stop 2300 
Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899-2300 
 
Telephone:  301-975-2200 
FAX:  301-948-3730 
E-mail:  SRMMSDS@nist.gov 
Website:  http://www.nist.gov/srm 

 
 
 
 
 
Emergency Telephone ChemTrec: 
  1-800-424-9300 
 +1-703-527-3887 
 

(North America) 
(International) 

2.  HAZARDS IDENTIFICATION 

Classification  

Physical Hazard: Compressed Gas. 
Health Hazard:  Simple Asphyxiant. 

Label Elements 
Symbol  

 

Signal Word 
WARNING 

Hazard Statement(s)  
H280 
------ 

Contains gas under pressure; may explode if heated. 
May displace oxygen and cause rapid suffocation. 

Precautionary Statement(s) 
P410 + P403 

Protect from sunlight.  Store in a well-ventilated place. 

Hazards Not Otherwise Classified:  Not applicable. 

Ingredients(s) with Unknown Acute Toxicity:  Not applicable. 

3.  COMPOSITION AND INFORMATION ON HAZARDOUS INGREDIENTS 

Substance:  Carbon dioxide in nitrogen, compressed gas 

Other Designations:   
 
 

Carbon Dioxide:  Carbonic acid gas, carbonic anhydride, CO2. 
Nitrogen:  Dinitrogen, nitrogen compressed. 

SRM 2625a 

 

Page 1 of 6 

Components are listed in compliance with OSHA’s 29 CFR 1910.1200; for the actual values see the Certificate of 
Analysis.   

Hazardous Components 

CAS Number 

Nitrogen 
Carbon Dioxide 

 
 

7727-37-9 
124-38-9 

4.  FIRST AID MEASURES 

Description of First Aid Measures:  

EC Number 
(EINECS) 

231-783-9 
204-696-9 

Nominal Mass Concentration 
(%) 

 

>96 

3.5 

Inhalation:  If adverse effects occur, remove to uncontaminated area.  If not breathing, give artificial respiration 
or oxygen by qualified personnel.  Seek immediate medical attention. 

Skin Contact:  Wash skin with soap and water for at least 15 minutes while removing contaminated clothing and 
shoes. Get medical attention, if needed. 

Eye Contact:  Immediately flush eyes, including under the eyelids with copious amounts of water for at least 
15 minutes.  Seek immediate medical attention. 

Ingestion:  Ingestion of a gas is unlikely.  As this product is a gas, refer to the inhalation section. 

Most Important Symptoms/Effects, Acute and Delayed:  Harmful if inhaled, blood damage, difficulty breathing, 
and suffocation. 

Indication of any immediate medical attention and special treatment needed, if necessary:  If any of the above 
symptoms are present, seek immediate medical attention.   

5.  FIRE FIGHTING MEASURES 

Fire and Explosion Hazards:  Negligible fire hazard applicable to the identified NIST cylinder.  Cylinders may rupture 
or explode if exposed to heat.  See Section 9, “Physical and Chemical Properties” for flammability properties. 

Extinguishing Media: 
 
 

Suitable:  Use extinguishing media appropriate to the surrounding fire. 
Unsuitable:  None listed. 

Specific Hazards Arising from the Chemical:  Oxides of nitrogen, oxides of carbon. 

Special Protective Equipment and Precautions for Fire-Fighters:  Move cylinder from fire area if it can be done 
without personal risk.  Avoid inhalation of material or combustion byproducts.  Wear full protective clothing and 
NIOSH approved self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA). 

NFPA Ratings (0 = Minimal; 1 = Slight; 2 = Moderate; 3 = Serious; 4 = Severe)  

 

Health = 2 

Fire = 0 

Reactivity = 0 

6.  ACCIDENTAL RELEASE MEASURES 

Personal  Precautions,  Protective  Equipment  and  Emergency  Procedures:    Immediately  contact  emergency 
personnel.  Keep unnecessary personnel away.  Use suitable protective equipment; see Section 8, “Exposure Controls 
and Personal Protection”.  Shut off gas supply if this can be done safely.  Isolate area until gas has dispersed.  

Methods  and  Materials  for  Containment  and  Clean  up:    Stop  leak  if  possible  without  personal  risk.    Isolate 
hazard area and deny entry.  Stay upwind and keep out of low areas. 

7.  HANDLING AND STORAGE 

Safe Handling Precautions:  Use only with adequate ventilation.  Do not puncture or incinerate container.  Close valve 
after each use and when empty.  Keep valve protection cap on cylinder when not in use.   

Storage:    Store  and  handle  in  accordance  with  all  current  regulations  and  standards.    Secure  cylinder  to  prevent 
physical damage.  Keep separated from incompatible substances (oxidizing materials, halogens, metal oxides, metals, 
combustible  materials,  lithium).    Store  in  well-ventilated  area.    Subject  to  storage  regulations,  OSHA 
29 CFR 1910.101. 

SRM 2625a 

 

Page 2 of 6 

8.  EXPOSURE CONTROLS AND PERSONAL PROTECTION 

Exposure Limits: 

Carbon Dioxide 
OSHA (PEL): 
ACGIH (TLV): 
 
NIOSH (REL): 
 
 

9 000 mg/m3 (5 000 ppm) TWA 
9 000 mg/m3 (5 000 ppm) TWA 
30 000 ppm STEL 
9 000 mg/m3 (5 000 ppm) TWA 
54 000 mg/m3 (30 000 ppm) STEL 
40 000 ppm IDLH 

Nitrogen 
ACGIH (TLV):  Simple asphyxiant. 

Engineering Controls:   Provide  local  exhaust  or  process  enclosure  ventilation  system.  Ensure  compliance  with 
applicable exposure limits. 

Personal Protection:  In accordance with OSHA 29 CFR 1910.132, subpart I, wear appropriate Personal Protective 
Equipment (PPE) to minimize exposure to this material. 

Respiratory Protection:    If workplace conditions warrant a respirator, a respiratory protection program that meets 
OSHA 29 CFR 1910.134 must be followed.   Refer to NIOSH 42 CFR 84 for applicable certified respirators. 

Eye/Face Protection:  Wear safety goggles. An eye wash station should be readily available near areas of use. 

Skin and Body Protection:  Personal protective equipment for the body should be selected based on the task being 
performed  and  the  risks  involved  and  should  be  approved  by  a  specialist  before  handling  this  product.  
Chemical-resistant gloves should be worn at all times when handling chemicals. 

9.  PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL PROPERTIES 

Component:  Nitrogen (>96 % concentration in this SRM) 

Descriptive Properties: 

Appearance (physical state, color, etc.): 
Molecular Formula: 
Molar Mass (g/mol): 
Odor: 
Odor threshold: 
pH: 
Evaporation rate: 
Melting point/freezing point (ºC): 
Relative Density (g/L): 
Vapor Pressure (mmHg): 
Vapor Density (air = 1): 
Viscosity (cP): 
Solubility(ies): 
Partition coefficient (n-octanol/water): 

Thermal Stability Properties: 

Autoignition Temperature: 
Thermal Decomposition 
Initial boiling point and boiling range (ºC): 
Explosive Limits, LEL: 
Explosive Limits, UEL: 
Flash Point: 
Flammability (solid, gas): 

10.  STABILITY AND REACTIVITY 

Reactivity:  Not reactive. 

Stability: 

X 

Stable 

 

Unstable 

Possible Hazardous Reactions:  None listed. 

colorless compressed gas 
N2 
28 
odorless 
not available 
not applicable 
not applicable 
–210 (–346 ºF) 
1.2506 
760 at –196 ºC 
0.967 
0.01787 at 27 ºC 
water, 1.6 % at 20 ºC; liquid ammonia 
not available 
 
not applicable 
not applicable 
–196 (–321 ºF) 
not applicable 
not applicable 
not applicable 
not applicable 

Conditions to Avoid:  Minimize contact with material.  Containers may rupture or explode if exposed to heat. 

SRM 2625a 

 

Page 3 of 6 

Incompatible Materials:  Oxidizing materials, halogens, metal oxides, metals, combustible materials, metal salts, 
halocarbons. 

Fire/Explosion Information:  See Section 5, “Fire Fighting Measures”. 

Hazardous Decomposition:  Miscellaneous decomposition products.  

Hazardous Polymerization: 

  Will Occur 

X  Will Not Occur 

11.  TOXICOLOGICAL INFORMATION 

Route of Exposure: 

X 

Inhalation 

 

Skin 

 

Ingestion 

Symptoms Related to the Physical, Chemical and Toxicological Characteristics:  Nausea, vomiting, chest pain, 
difficulty breathing, irregular heartbeat, headache, disorientation, emotional disturbances, pain in extremities, tremors, 
loss of coordination, hearing loss, visual disturbances. 

Potential Health Effects (Acute, Chronic and Delayed): 

Inhalation:   

Carbon Dioxide:  Acute exposure to carbon dioxide at concentrations of 2 % to 10 %, (NIST provided cylinder 
is 3.5 %), may cause acidic taste, dyspnea, headache, vertigo, nausea, labored breathing, weakness, drowsiness, 
mental confusion, and increase in blood pressure.  At higher concentrations, visual disturbances, tinnitus, tremors, 
perspiration, restlessness, discomfort, convulsions, loss of consciousness, coma, and death.  In addition, carbon 
dioxide/nitrogen  compressed  gas  mixture  is  an  asphyxiant.    Release  in  an  enclosed  space  may  result  in 
asphyxiation.  The symptoms of asphyxia depend on the rapidity with which the oxygen deficiency develops and 
how long it continues.  In sudden acute asphyxia, unconsciousness may be immediate.  With slow development, 
there may be rapid respiration and pulse, air hunger, dizziness, reduced awareness, tightness in the head, tingling 
sensations, incoordination, faulty judgment, emotional instability, and rapid fatigue.  As the asphyxia progresses, 
nausea, vomiting, collapse, unconsciousness, convulsions, deep coma, and death are possible. 

Nitrogen:    Nitrogen  compressed  gas  is  a  simple  asphyxiant.    Release  in  an  enclosed  space  may  result  in 
asphyxiation.  The symptoms of asphyxia depend on the rapidity with which the oxygen deficiency develops and 
how long it continues.  In sudden acute asphyxia, unconsciousness may be immediate.  With slow development, 
there may be rapid respiration and pulse, air hunger, dizziness, reduced awareness, tightness in the head, tingling 
sensations, incoordination, faulty judgment, emotional instability, and rapid fatigue.  As the asphyxia progresses, 
nausea, vomiting, collapse, unconsciousness, convulsions, deep coma, and death are possible.  

Skin Contact:  No information on significant adverse effects. 

Eye  Contact:    Carbon  dioxide  at  high  concentration  in  air  may  cause  a  stinging  sensation  of  the  eyes.    Not 
applicable for exposure to nitrogen. 

Ingestion:  Ingestion of a gas is unlikely under normal conditions of use (see “Inhalation”).   

Numerical Measures of Toxicity:  

Acute Toxicity:  Not classified. 
Carbon dioxide: Rat, Inhalation LC50:  470 000 ppm (30 min) 
Nitrogen: Simple asphyxiant 

Skin Corrosion/Irritation:  Not applicable. 

Serious Eye damage/ Eye irritation:  Not applicable. 

Respiratory Sensitization:  No data available. 

Skin Sensitization:  No data available. 

Germ Cell Mutagenicity:  No data available. 

 

 

 

SRM 2625a 

 

Page 4 of 6 

Carcinogenicity:  Not classified. 

Listed as a Carcinogen/Potential Carcinogen 

 
Nitrogen is not listed by NTP, IARC or OSHA as a carcinogen. 
Carbon dioxide is not listed by NTP, IARC or OSHA as a carcinogen. 

Yes 

Reproductive Toxicity:  Not classified, effect due mostly to asphyxia. 
Carbon dioxide: Rat, Inhalation TCLo:  6 % (24 h, pregnant 10 d). 

Specific Target Organ Toxicity, Single Exposure:  Not classified. 

Specific Target Organ Toxicity, Repeated Exposure:  Not classified. 

X  No 

Rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss), LC50:  35 mg/L (96 h) 

Aspiration Hazard:  No data available.   

12.  ECOLOGICAL INFORMATION 

Ecotoxicity Data: 
Carbon Dioxide 

Persistence and Degradability:  No data available.  

Bioaccumulative Potential:  No bioaccumulation.  

Mobility in Soil:  No data available. 

Other Adverse effects:  No data available. 

13.  DISPOSAL CONSIDERATIONS 

Waste Disposal:  Dispose of waste in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations.   

U.S. DOT and IATA:  UN1956,  Compressed gas, n.o.s. (Carbon Dioxide in Nitrogen); Hazard Class 2.2. 

14.  TRANSPORTATION INFORMATION 

15.  REGULATORY INFORMATION 

U.S. Regulations: 

CERCLA Sections 102a/103 (40 CFR 302.4):  Identified cylinder not regulated. 

SARA Title III Section 302 (40 CFR 355.30):  Identified cylinder not regulated.   

SARA Title III Section 304 (40 CFR 355.40):  Identified cylinder not regulated. 

SARA Title III Section 313 (40 CFR 372.65):  Identified cylinder not regulated. 

OSHA Process Safety (29 CFR 1910.119):  Identified cylinder not regulated.   

SARA Title III Sections 311/312 Hazardous Categories (40 CFR 370.21): 

ACUTE HEALTH: 
CHRONIC HEALTH: 
FIRE: 
REACTIVE: 
PRESSURE: 

Yes. 
No. 
No. 
No. 
Yes. 

State Regulations: 

California Proposition 65:  Not listed. 

U.S. TSCA Inventory:  Carbon dioxide and nitrogen are listed. 

TSCA 12(b), Export Notification:  No components are listed. 

Canadian Regulations: 

WHMIS Information:  Not provided for this material. 

 

 

SRM 2625a 

 

Page 5 of 6 

16.  OTHER INFORMATION 

Issue Date:  19 July 2017 

Sources: 

ChemADVISOR, Inc., SDS, Nitrogen, Compressed Gas, 09 December 2015. 

ChemADVISOR, Inc., SDS, Carbon Dioxide, 09 December 2015. 

NIOSH  RTECS,  Carbon  Dioxide,  No.  FF6400000,  CAS  No.  124-38-9;  May  2009;  available  at 
http://www.cdc.gov/niosh-rtecs/FF61A800.html (accessed July 2017). 

National  Library  of  Medicine,  Hazardous  Substances  Databank,  Carbon  dioxide,  Animal  Toxicity 
Studies; available at http://toxnet.nlm.nih.gov/newtoxnet/hsdb.htm (accessed July 2017) 

Key of Acronyms:   

ACGIH 

ALI 
CAS  
CERCLA  

CFR  
DOT  
EINECS 

EPCRA  

IARC  
IATA  
IDLH  
LC50 
LD50 
LEL  
MSDS  
NFPA  
NIOSH  
NIST 
n.o.s.  

NRC 

NTP  
OSHA  
PEL  

RCRA  
REL  
RQ  

American Conference of Governmental Industrial 
Hygienists 
Annual Limit on Intake 
Chemical Abstracts Service  
Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation, and Liability Act  
Code of Federal Regulations  
Department of Transportation  
European Inventory of Existing Commercial 
Chemical Substances  
Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know 
Act  
SARA  
International Agency for Research on Cancer  
SCBA  
International Air Transport Association  
SRM  
Immediately Dangerous to Life and Health  
STEL  
Lethal Concentration  
TLV  
Median Lethal Dose or Lethal Dose, 50 % 
TPQ  
Lower Explosive Limit  
TSCA  
Material Safety Data Sheet  
National Fire Protection Association  
TWA  
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health   UEL  
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Not Otherwise Specified 

RTECS 

WHMIS 
 

Nuclear Regulatory Commission 

National Toxicology Program 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration  
Permissible Exposure Limit 

Resource Conservation and Recovery Act  
Recommended Exposure Limit  
Reportable Quantity  

Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances 

Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act  
Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus  
Standard Reference Material  
Short Term Exposure Limit  
Threshold Limit Value  
Threshold Planning Quantity  
Toxic Substances Control Act  
Time Weighted Average  
Upper Explosive Limit  
Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Disclaimer:   Physical  and  chemical  data  contained  in  this  SDS  are  provided  only  for  use  in  assessing  the 
hazardous nature of the material.  The SDS was prepared carefully, using current references; however, NIST does not 
certify the data in the SDS.    The certified values for this material are given in the NIST Certificate of Analysis. 

Users of this SRM should ensure that the SDS in their possession is current.  This can be accomplished by contacting 
the SRM Program: telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srmmsds@nist.gov; or via the Internet at 
http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 2625a 

 

Page 6 of 6 

