 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE:  31 July 2017 
 
Product Identifier 

SRM Number:  2861 
SRM Name: 
 

Restricted Elements in Polyvinyl Chloride 

Under the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 29 CFR 1910.1200, 
this Standard Reference Material (SRM) is NOT classified as a physical hazard or a health hazard, a simple asphyxiant, 
combustible  dust,  pyrophoric  gas,  or  hazard  not  otherwise  classified.    There  are  no  hazard  pictograms,  hazard 
statements or signal word associated with it.  Safety Data Sheet information is not required.  This document may be 
used in conjunction with your hazard communication program. 
 
This material is formed to a specific shape or design during manufacture which under normal conditions of use does 
not release more than very small quantities, e.g., minute or trace amounts of a hazardous chemical (as determined 
under paragraph (d) of 1910.1200), and does not pose a physical hazard or health risk to employees. 
 
Description:  This Standard Reference Material (SRM) is intended primarily for use in validation of chemical and 
instrumental methods of analysis of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and materials of similar matrix for restricted, additive 
and tramp element contents.  It can be used to validate value assignment of in-house reference materials.  A unit of 
SRM 2861 consists of one bottle containing approximately 25 g of PVC pellets. 
 
Disposal:  SRM 2861 should be disposed of in accordance with local, state, and federal regulations. 
 
Transport  Information:    This  material  is  not  regulated  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Transportation (DOT)  and/or 
International Air Transport Association (IATA). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:  This document was prepared carefully, using current references.  Users of this SRM should ensure that 
this document and the corresponding Certificate of Analysis in their possession are current.  This can be accomplished 
by contacting the SRM Program:  telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srmmsds@nist.gov; or via 
the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 2861 

 

Page 1 of 1 

