 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE:  09 September 2014 
 
Product Identifier 

RM Number:  8097 
RM Name:    MEMS 5-in-1 Test Chip 

Under the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 29 CFR 1910.1200, 
this  Reference  Material  (RM)  is  NOT  classified  as  a  physical  hazard  or  a  health  hazard,  a  simple  asphyxiant, 
combustible  dust,  pyrophoric  gas,  or  hazard  not  otherwise  classified.    There  are  no  hazard  pictograms,  hazard 
statements or signal word associated with it.  Safety Data Sheet information is not required.  This document may be 
used in conjunction with your hazard communication program. 
 
Exemption:    1910.1200  (c).    This  RM  is  an  Article,  as  the  word  is  defined  by  OSHA,  where  Article  means  a 
manufactured item other than a fluid or particle: (i) which is formed to a specific shape or design during manufacture; 
(ii) which has end use function(s) dependent in whole or in part upon its shape or design during end use; and (iii) 
which under normal conditions of use does not release more than very small quantities, e.g., minute or trace amounts 
of a hazardous chemical (as determined under paragraph (d) of 1910.1200), and does not pose a physical hazard or 
health risk to employees.  
 
Description:  This RM is a microelectromechanical system (MEMS) 5-in-1 test chip.  RM 8097 is intended to allow 
customers to compare their in-house measurements with NIST measurements for five standard test methods, thereby, 
validating their use of the documentary standard test methods.  A unit of RM 8097 consists of a MEMS test chip atop 
a  piezoelectric  transducer  (PZT)  in  a  hybrid  package,  a  thumb  drive  containing  additional  user  information,  data 
analysis  sheets  that  contain  the  values  from  NIST  measurements,  this  Report  of  Investigation  (ROI),  and  the  five 
standard test methods. 
 
Disposal:  RM 8097 should be disposed of in accordance with local, state, and federal regulations. 
 
Transport  Information:    This  material  is  not  regulated  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Transportation  (DOT)  and/or 
International Air Transportation Association (IATA). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:  This document was prepared carefully, using current references.  Users of this RM should ensure that 
this document and the corresponding Report of Investigation in their possession are current.  This can be accomplished 
by contacting the SRM Program:  telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srmmsds@nist.gov; or via 
the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

RM 8097 

 

Page 1 of 1 

