 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DATE:  12 February 2016 
 
Product Identifier 

SRM Number:  927e 
SRM Name: 
 

Bovine Serum Albumin (7 % Solution) 
(Total Protein Standard) 

Under the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health  Administration (OSHA) 29 CFR 1910.1200, 
this Standard Reference Material (SRM) is NOT classified as a physical hazard or a health hazard, a simple asphyxiant, 
combustible  dust,  pyrophoric  gas,  or  hazard  not  otherwise  classified.    There  are  no  hazard  pictograms,  hazard 
statements or signal word associated with it.  Safety Data Sheet information is not required.  This document may be 
used in conjunction with your hazard communication program. 
 
Exemption:  1910.1200(b)(6)(xii).  This SRM is a biological material and should be considered a potential biological 
hazard. 
 
Description:    This  SRM  is  intended  primarily  for  use  in  the  standardization  of  procedures  employed  in  clinical 
analyses for total serum protein, for critical evaluation of daily working standards used in these procedures, and as a 
reference standard for assays of total protein by colorimetric methods.  This SRM is a solution (mass fraction 7 %) of 
known protein concentration and purity.  A unit of 927e consists of 10 ampoules, each containing 2.2 mL of solution. 
 
Additional Notes for Biomaterials:  SRM 927e IS INTENDED FOR  RESEARCH USE.  The blood used in the 
preparation  of  SRM 927e  Bovine  Serum  Albumin  (7 %  Solution)  was  collected  from  cattle  sourced  in  the  United 
States.    Only  blood  from  cattle/carcasses  that  have  passed  ante-mortem  and  post-mortem  U.S. Department  of 
Agriculture (USDA) Food Safety Inspection Service (FSIS) inspection was used.  This material has not come from 
cattle that have been in a herd in which a case of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE) has appeared, and the 
product  does  not  contain,  and  is  not  derived  from,  specified  risk  material  as  defined  in  Commission  Decision 
97/534/EC.  No bovine blood was used from tuberculosis and/or brucellosis reactors.  No bovine blood was used from 
animals subject to emergency slaughter or identified as U.S. Suspect.  See Certificate of Analysis for storage and use 
instructions. 
 
Disposal:  SRM 927e components and derived solutions should be disposed of in accordance with local, state, and 
federal regulations. 
 
Transport  Information:    This  material  is  not  regulated  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Transportation  (DOT)  and/or 
International Air Transport Association (IATA). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer:  This document was prepared carefully, using current references.  Users of this SRM should ensure that 
this document and the corresponding Certificate of Analysis in their possession are current.  This can be accomplished 
by contacting the SRM Program:  telephone (301) 975-2200; fax (301) 948-3730; e-mail srmmsds@nist.gov; or via 
the Internet at http://www.nist.gov/srm. 

SRM 927e 

 

Page 1 of 1 

